Body




Statement of Keith Hall
Director
Congressional Budget Office

Committee on Senate Budget

May 19, 2015

Chairman Enzi, Ranking Member Sanders, and Members of the
Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to come before you today
to discuss the work of the Congressional Budget Office. I would
like to begin by thanking the Members of the committee and their
staff for the support they have provided to CBO over many years,
enabling the agency to provide timely, carefully thought-out
nonpartisan budgetary and economic analysis to the Congress as it
addresses the critical issues facing the nation.

The Congressional budget process is complex, and CBO obviously
plays a significant role in it. Over the years, CBO has relied on
the budget committees to explain and communicate to others in the
Congress what its role in that process is, to provide
constructive feedback on how the agency can best serve the
Congress, and to provide guidance on what legislative
developments are occurring and what the Congress`s priorities
are. We are grateful for the support and guidance that the budget
committees have provided throughout the 40 years of CBO`s
existence.

The Congressional Budget Act of 1974 instituted a formal process
through which the Congress could develop, coordinate, and enforce
its own budgetary priorities and created legislative institutions
to implement the new Congressional budget process: the House and
Senate Budget Committees to oversee execution of the budget
process and the Congressional Budget Office to provide the budget
committees and the Congress with objective, impartial information
about budgetary and economic issues. CBO`s work follows processes
specified in that law or developed by the agency in concert with
the budget committees and the Congressional leadership. The
agency`s chief responsibility under that law is to help the
budget committees with the matters under their jurisdiction. It
also supports other Congressional committees particularly the
Appropriations, Ways and Means, and Finance Committees, as
required by the Budget Act and the Congressional leadership.

To fulfill its mission to serve the Congress, CBO does the
following:

Prepares reports on the outlook for the economy;

Analyzes trends and recent developments related to federal
spending and revenues and constructs budget projections for the
next 10 years and the longer term;

Estimates the effects of the President`s budgetary proposals and
numerous alternative policy choices on the budget and the
economy;

Estimates the cost of legislative proposals which involves
providing formal cost estimates for all bills reported by
committees of the House and Senate, many more informal cost
estimates while legislation is being developed, estimates of the
cost of all appropriation bills, and estimates of the cost of
numerous amendments as legislation is considered by the House and
Senate;

Estimates the cost of intergovernmental and private-sector
mandates in reported bills;

Conducts policy studies of governmental activities, policy
choices facing lawmakers, and other developments that have
significant budgetary and economic impacts which involves
analyzing Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, other benefit
programs, national security issues, energy policy, environmental
issues, tax policy, labor markets, education policy, housing
policy, government credit programs, infrastructure, immigration
policy, and many other topics; and

Provides testimonies on a broad range of budget and economic
issues.

In 2014, for example, CBO produced several hundred formal cost
estimates and mandate statements, thousands of informal
estimates, more than 100 ``scorekeeping`` tabulations for
appropriation acts, and multiple budget projections and economic
forecasts. In addition, the agency released several dozen
analytic reports and working papers. (For some details, see the
appendix.)

For fiscal year 2016, CBO has requested an appropriation of $47.3
million, an increase of $1.6 million, or 3.4 percent, from the
$45.7 million provided to the agency for 2015. In the coming
year, CBO will continue to be guided by its core values, seek to
devote additional resources to macroeconomic analysis and health
care issues, and focus on meeting three broad goals: continuing
to provide the Congress with budget and economic information that
is objective, insightful, and timely; presenting and explaining
the methodology and results of CBO`s analyses clearly; and
improving CBO`s internal management.

CBO Will Continue to Be Guided by Core Values

In a 1976 memorandum, CBO`s founding director, Dr. Alice Rivlin,
enunciated some of the agency`s core values: As we begin the
first full year with the new Congressional budget procedures in
place, I want to emphasize once again that CBO must be, and must
be perceived to be, an objective, non-partisan, professional
organization in the service of the Congress. . . . Our work and
our publications must always be balanced, thorough and free of
any partisan tinge. . . . Our task is to provide information
which will help the whole Congress in reaching its decisions.

The agency is committed to providing information that is:

Objective representing not the personal opinions of CBO staff but
the consensus and diversity of views of experts from around the
country;

Insightful applying the best new evidence and innovative ideas as
well as the lessons of experience;

Timely responding as quickly as possible to the needs of the
Congress; and

Clearly presented and explained so that policymakers and analysts
understand the basis for the agency`s findings and have the
opportunity to question the analysis and methods used.

In keeping with CBO`s mandate to provide analysis that is
objective and impartial, the agency makes no policy
recommendations. Instead, it strives to present fully and fairly
the likely consequences of alternative proposals being considered
by the Congress so that lawmakers can make informed policy
choices.

All of CBO`s estimates and reports are reviewed internally for
objectivity, analytical soundness, and clarity. That rigorous
process involves multiple people at different levels in the
organization. In addition, CBO consults with numerous outside
experts who represent a variety of perspectives. The experts
include professors, analysts at think tanks, representatives of
industry groups, other private-sector experts, and people working
for federal agencies and for state and local governments. CBO`s
analytic reports are reviewed by outside experts who specialize
in the issue at hand and who have diverse views about the topic
being analyzed and methods of analysis. In some cases, those
experts are members of CBO`s Panel of Economic Advisers or Panel
of Health Advisers.

Although such experts provide considerable assistance, CBO is
solely responsible for its work. CBO makes its work widely
available to the Congress and the public by releasing publicly
all of its formal cost estimates and analytic reports. It
delivers its work to interested Members of Congress and their
staff, including, in particular, the sponsor of legislation or
requester of a report, the Chairman and Ranking Member of the com
mittees of jurisdiction, and the budget committees. Soon after
delivery to those key interested parties, the agency posts the
work on its website. In addition, an email service, Twitter
announcements, and RSS feeds notify subscribers when the agency
publishes work. CBO continually strives to make its work more
accessible on its website and on its social media platforms. For
example, the agency has made a number of enhancements to the
website, such as creating a special collection for major
recurring reports and producing an online version of its budget
options volume.

In some circumstances, though, the needs of the Congress lead CBO
to keep the results of an analysis confidential. Such analyses
include informal cost estimates and other types of information
produced to assist in the development of legislation. Those
informal communications are preliminary because they do not
undergo the same review required for formal estimates. They are
often prepared when committees are evaluating alternative pro
posals to accomplish their goals, have not made any specific
proposals public, and need the flexibility to modify their
proposals before they become public, sometimes in response to
CBO`s preliminary estimates. In fact, CBO`s analysts often
provide informal, preliminary estimates to committee staff for a
broad range of legislative options, making possible the
consideration of different approaches before a specific
legislative path is decided upon. In such situations, CBO
recognizes that the confidentiality of its work is critical to
committees` deliberations, so it keeps its informal estimates
confidential as long as the proposals are not made public. (Such
confidentiality generally does not apply to proposals that differ
only in minor details from ones that are in the public domain.)
However, once such a proposal becomes public as introduced
legislation or through public discussion of its major elements
CBO makes its estimate for that proposal available to any
interested party in the Congress.

CBO Aims to Devote More Resources to Macroeconomic Analysis and
Health Care Issues

About one-quarter of the requested increase in CBO`s budget,
roughly $440,000, would fund three new full-time-equivalent
positions (FTEs): The agency aims to boost its staffing from the
235 FTEs contemplated in the 2015 appropriation to 238 for 2016.
The additional FTEs would be devoted to analyzing the economic
effects of federal tax and spending policies, including conduct
ing ``dynamic analysis`` of certain legislation as specified in
the budget resolution, and analyzing health care issues.

Give Special Emphasis to Dynamic Analysis

In May 2015, the Congress adopted a concurrent resolution on the
budget for fiscal year 2016 requiring CBO, to the greatest extent
practicable, to incorporate macro-economic effects into its cost
estimates for major legislation approved by Congressional
committees. Because macro-economic analyses require complex
modeling and a significant amount of time, they can be produced
only for a small number of major proposals, and only if time
allows.

With a few exceptions, CBO`s cost estimates for individual
legislative proposals in previous years have not reflected
changes in behavior that would affect the total output of the
economy, such as any changes in the labor supply or private
investment resulting from changes in fiscal policy, and that
would thereby affect the federal budget. That is, CBO`s cost
estimates have generally not included what is sometimes known as
dynamic scoring. CBO and the budget committees have followed that
approach since the Congressional budget process was established
in the 1970s, reflecting the infeasibility of completing macro-
economic analysis of all proposed legislation, the negligible
budgetary impact of the macroeconomic effects of most
legislation, and the uncertainty of such estimates. The only
exceptions have been a few cost estimates for immigration
legislation that would have substantially increased the size of
the U.S. labor force. Assuming that those bills would have had no
effect on overall output would have ignored one of their primary
effects and distorted the estimates too severely.

Nevertheless, CBO has devoted significant effort to developing
analytical tools that enable the agency to assess the
macroeconomic effects of fiscal policies. In selected reports as
distinguished from cost estimates CBO has provided estimates of
the effects that significant changes in federal spending and tax
policies would have on the overall economy. Some of those
analyses have also examined how the projected changes in the
economy would in turn affect the federal budget. Recent reports
incorporating such analyses include the agency`s annual
examination of the economic impact of the President`s budget, its
annual Long-Term Budget Outlook, and several reports on the
macroeconomic effects of alternative budgetary paths, including
those specified in the recently passed Congressional budget
resolution. CBO has also reported on some of the economic effects
of policies on other occasions for the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009, the Affordable Care Act, and proposed
legislation to increase the minimum wage, for instance.

CBO expects to devote considerable attention to further
developing its capacity to conduct dynamic analysis in the coming
year, so that it can effectively carry out the requirements
specified in the budget resolution. The agency anticipates that
the form in which the information is provided to the Congress
will evolve over time depending on what sort of presentation
seems most useful. Cost estimates that incorporate dynamic
analysis will include all of the information typically presented
in cost estimates as well as information on the macroeconomic
effects and the uncertainty surrounding those effects. To the
extent possible within the time available, CBO will explain the
basis for determining the budgetary impact of macroeconomic
effects. The agency has already shifted some resources to bolster
its dynamic analysis and has requested funding for additional
staff to work on such analyses.

Give Special Emphasis to Analysis of Federal Health Care Spending

CBO faces significant challenges in projecting the future costs
of federal health care programs and in analyzing proposals to
change those programs. Although spending for health care in the
United States has grown more slowly in recent years than it had
previously, health care spending per person has grown faster, on
average, than the nation`s economic output per person during the
past few decades.

THE WORK OF THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE MAY 2015

CBO expects that federal spending on the government`s major
health care programs will continue to rise substantially relative
to the size of the economy, though the estimates are subject to a
considerable degree of uncertainty. A particular challenge
currently is assessing the extent to which the recent slowdown in
the growth of health care spending results from temporary factors
like the recession or, instead, reflects more enduring
developments. CBO has found no direct link between the recession
and slower growth in spending for Medicare. Accordingly, over the
past several years, CBO has substantially reduced its 10-year and
long-term projections of spending per person for Medicare, for
Medicaid, and for the country as a whole. However, the growth
rates for such spending per person are expected to rebound
somewhat from their recent very low levels without returning all
the way to the high levels of the past.

Interest in legislative proposals related to health care on the
part of committees of jurisdiction, the Congressional leadership,
and the budget committees remains very high. The enactment of the
Affordable Care Act in 2010 has been followed by a great deal of
Congressional interest in analysis of that legislation and of
possible modifications to it. Several developments and
possibilities could heighten that interest, along with CBO`s
workload. More data will become available about the costs of the
expansion of health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care
Act, which will further understanding of potential effects of
changing that law. In addition, the Supreme Court`s upcoming
ruling regarding that act could require changes to CBO`s baseline
projections for health care spending and could lead to
significant legislative activity.

In the coming year, CBO expects to expend a great deal of effort
analyzing health care spending. The agency is in the process of
analyzing various aspects of the health care system and enhancing
its analytical capacity to assess the effects of future
legislation on that system and on the federal budget. It is
training a number of new analysts to replace those who have
recently retired or accepted attractive offers to work elsewhere
and continues to recruit analysts to boost the quantity of
analysis while maintaining or enhancing the quality.

CBO Will Focus on Meeting Three Broad Goals

On a broader scale, in carrying out its mission of serving the
Congress during 2015 and 2016, CBO will focus on meeting three
goals:

Continue to provide the Congress with budget and economic
information that is objective, insightful, and timely.

Continue to present and explain the methodology and results of
CBO`s analyses clearly.

Continue to improve CBO`s internal management.

Continue to Provide the Congress With Budget and Economic
Information That Is Objective, Insightful, and Timely

In the coming year, CBO expects to provide the following
estimates and other analyses to the Congress in quantities
roughly similar to last year`s:

--About 20 reports presenting an assessment of budgetary
developments during the current fiscal year, the outlook for the
budget and the economy, analyses of the President`s budget, long-
term budget projections, and options for reducing budget
deficits;

--More than 500 formal cost estimates, most of which will include
not only estimates of federal costs but also assessments of the
cost of mandates imposed on state, local, and tribal governments
or the private sector;

--Thousands of preliminary, informal cost estimates, the demand
for which is very high as committees seek to have a clear picture
of the budgetary impact of proposals and variants of proposals
before they formally consider legislation;

--About 120 scorekeeping tabulations, including account-level
detail for individual appropriation acts at all stages of the
legislative process and summary tables showing the status of
discretionary appropriations (by appropriations subcommittee) and
running totals on a year-to-date basis; and

--Roughly 85 analytic reports and other publications generally
required by law or prepared in response to requests from the
Chairmen and Ranking Members of key committees on a broad range
of topics, including health care, policies for increasing
economic growth and opportunity, changes in benefit programs,
defense policy, infrastructure, energy policy, and the
government`s role in the financial system. Those publications
will also include working papers to enhance the transparency of
CBO`s analysis and to encourage external review of that analysis.

THE WORK OF THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE

Such a body of analysis requires very hard work by CBO`s highly
dedicated staff. Nevertheless, the agency expects that the
anticipated volume of estimates and other analyses it can produce
will fall considerably short of the number of Congressional
requests. The demands on CBO remain intense, especially with
regard to health care issues: In addition to the interest in
analyses of the Affordable Care Act and possible modifications to
it, committees are considering many other types of proposals for
changes in federal health care programs. Also, the slow recovery
from the economic downturn has spurred interest in the agency`s
economic forecasts and in policies that might affect economic
growth and opportunity in both the near term and the longer term.

Moreover, the surge in federal debt and the high level of
projected deficits have led to ongoing Congressional efforts to
enact fundamental changes in spending and tax policies. Other
issues arise frequently and create a heavy workload including,
for example, ones surrounding the Highway Trust Fund,
immigration, defense authorization bills, farm legislation,
employment benefits, trade adjustment assistance, and reform of
the Postal Service.

Analyzing the possibilities and proposals has strained the
agency`s resources in many areas. As a result, responding in a
balanced way to requests from both the majority and minority of
multiple committees in both the Senate and the House is a
continuing challenge. CBO regularly consults with committees and
the Congressional leadership to ensure that its resources are
focused on the work that is of highest priority to the Congress.

Continue to Present and Explain the Methodology and Results of
Analyses Clearly

CBO makes a considerable effort to make its work transparent by
explaining the basis of its findings so that Members of Congress,
their staff, and outside analysts can understand the results and
question the methodologies used. In particular, although much of
the work that CBO does is extremely technical in nature, the
agency devotes substantial time and energy to presenting the work
as clearly and nontechnically as possible.

Obtaining feedback in response to those efforts is a key element
of CBO`s efforts to ensure that the information it provides is of
the highest quality; another key element is conducting extensive
external review of the agency`s analytic reports before they are
released and of the methodologies on which its products are
based. In the coming year, input from outside experts and exten
sive external review will remain an important component of
transparency:

CBO will continue to solicit external professional review of its
work so that the agency`s analyses reflect both the consensus and
diversity of views of experts from around the country.

CBO`s reports will be reviewed by outside experts before
publication. Those reviewers will include professors, analysts at
think tanks, private-sector experts, and employees at other
government agencies. CBO will select reviewers whom it expects to
have diverse views about the topics being analyzed and methods of
analysis.

The agency`s cost estimates will often draw on consultation with
outside experts.

The agency`s Panel of Economic Advisers will meet twice to
provide input on the agency`s latest economic forecast and other
issues, and the agency`s Panel of Health Advisers will meet to
evaluate the agency`s analyses of health care issues and examine
new research in health care and health care financing. CBO will
also regularly consult with those distinguished experts and other
experts for guidance on the agency`s work on a broad range of
topics.

CBO`s documents and related information will aim to go well
beyond presentations of results:

Formal cost estimates will describe the basis for the estimate
that is, the information that CBO collected and how that
information was used in constructing the estimates.

The agency will document and explain the revisions to its budget
projections in each successive baseline, and it will report on
the accuracy of its projections. CBO has recently released an
assessment of the accuracy of its economic forecasts and will
soon release a similar analysis of its revenue forecasts.

The agency will publish supplementary data and other technical
information with some of its key reports.

Many of CBO`s reports will provide substantial discussions of the
relevant research literature and CBO`s modeling approaches in the
text, in separate boxes, or in appendixes.

THE WORK OF THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE MAY 2015

CBO will publish background reports and working papers providing
details about its analyses for nonexperts and technical
descriptions for experts.

And the agency will promote transparency by providing broad
access:

--When CBO completes a budget or economic projection, a cost
estimate for a public piece of legislation, or another type of
analysis, it will make the results of that analysis available
immediately to all Members of Congress, their staff, and the
public.

--CBO`s analysts will regularly explain details underlying the
agency`s estimates and other analyses to interested Hill staff.

--To promote discussion among experts in the field, CBO`s
analysts will present their work including descriptions of their
modeling approaches in working papers and at professional
conferences.

Examples from CBO`s past work illustrate other aspects of the
agency`s commitment to transparency. For instance, when CBO
revised its views of the effectiveness of malpractice reform in
reducing health care costs, of the effect of prescription drug
use on Medicare`s spending for other health care services, and of
the effect on the budget deficit of raising Medicare`s age of
eligibility to 67, it issued reports explaining why.

In addition, CBO undertakes and publishes analyses of the
sensitivity of its estimates to key parameters. For example,
CBO`s analyses of the economic effects of fiscal policies include
alternative estimates that would apply if various effects were
stronger or weaker than expected such as the amount of short-term
restraint provided by higher taxes or lower government spending,
the response of the labor supply to changes in tax rates, the
effects of budget deficits on private saving and international
capital flows, and the effect of changes in federal investment on
the economy. Similarly, a report on employment-based health
insurance under the Affordable Care Act showed how the results
would vary if employers` and employees` responses to that act
differed from the agency`s expectations.

Because the overall demand for CBO`s work is high and its
resources are constrained, the agency needs to balance the desire
to publish more detail about finished analyses with requests for
new analyses and with its other responsibilities, such as
regularly updating its baseline budget and economic projections.
Much of CBO`s analysis is very technical, so publishing
explanations of the models and other analytic techniques used is
time-consuming. Because the pace of Congressional action often
requires CBO to produce its analysis quickly, the amount of
explanation that can be provided when an estimate or analytic
report is released is usually limited by the time available. How
to strike the appropriate balance between publishing additional
explanation, undertaking new analyses, and pursuing other
responsibilities is part of the guidance about priorities that
CBO seeks from committees and the Congressional leadership.

Continue to Improve Internal Management

In addition to focusing directly on serving the Congress, CBO
devotes resources to attracting and retaining talented people,
developing their skills, and providing the support services and
other infrastructure needed to make them as productive as
possible. In a recent assessment conducted by the Partnership for
Public Service, CBO was ranked the sixth best place to work among
30 small federal agencies and received higher ratings than all
but one of the midsized and large agencies. CBO is incorporating
the feedback from the survey into the broad management goals that
it has pursued in recent years, including keeping staff current
in their fields and enhancing the agency`s ability to communicate
clearly.

CBO continues to face considerable competitive pressure in
attracting and retaining the highly educated and skilled
employees that it needs. More than two-thirds of CBO`s staff
consists of economists and budget analysts. Talented people with
those backgrounds are highly sought by other government agencies,
private analytic organizations, universities, and private
companies. Some of CBO`s economists and budget analysts could
earn significantly higher compensation working in the executive
branch, and many could do so working in the private sector.
Moreover, the gap between the compensation that CBO can provide
and the compensation that people with such backgrounds can
receive elsewhere is increasing. For example, in the past 17
years, the average inflation-adjusted annual salary paid to
professors of economics has risen by about 47 percent, while the
highest inflation-adjusted annual salary paid at CBO has fallen
by 7 percent. In addition, most of CBO`s staff who are not
economists or budget analysts work in other fields with
competitive private labor markets; that group includes
information technology professionals, lawyers, and others.

To attract and retain talented employees, CBO relies heavily on
the nonmonetary rewards of working at the agency. Fortunately,
the appeal of the agency`s mission to provide objective analyses,
the intellectual challenges, the open and collaborative culture
that the agency has maintained since its founding, and the
satisfaction of public service have enabled CBO to build a
dedicated and skilled workforce. However, with the current limits
on the salaries that CBO can pay in the competitive markets for
economists, budget analysts, and other professionals, hiring and
retaining strong performers will be difficult over the long term.

This testimony incorporates information from CBO`s Appropriation
Request for Fiscal Year 2016, testimony provided by CBO`s
Director before the Subcommittee on the Legislative Branch of the
Senate Committee on Appropriations on March 10, 2015. That
document represents the work of many people at CBO.