Body




Statement of John B. Taylor
Professor of Economics
Stanford University

Committee on House Financial Services
Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade

July 22, 2015

Chair Huizenga, Ranking Member Moore, and members of the
Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade, thank you for inviting
me to testify at this hearing on ``Examining Federal Reserve
Reform Proposals,`` including the Federal Reserve Reform Act of
2015 and the Centennial Monetary Commission Act of 2015.

The Federal Reserve Reform Act of 2015 as stated in Section 2,
Requirements for Policy Rules of the Federal Open Market
Committee would require that the Fed ``describe the strategy or
rule of the Federal Open Market Committee for the systematic
quantitative adjustment`` of its policy instruments.2 According
to the bill, the Fed would choose the strategy and how to
describe it. The Fed could change its strategy or deviate from it
if circumstances called for a change, in which case the Fed would
have to explain why.

In evaluating this bill it is important to emphasize the word
``strategy`` as explicitly stated in the bill. Though economists
frequently use the word ``rule,`` that term may convey the false
idea that a rules-based monetary strategy must be purely
mechanical. In a conference volume3 published last December,
George Shultz explained the importance of having a strategy. He
wrote that ``. . .it is important, based on my own experience, to
have a rules-based monetary policy. . .. at least as I have
observed from policy decisions over the years in various fields,
if you have a strategy, you get somewhere. If you don`t have a
strategy, you are just a tactician at large and it doesn`t add
up.`` Fed Chair Janet Yellen similarly explained in a speech4 in
the 1990s that ``The existence of policy tradeoffs requires a
strategy for managing them,`` and she described a rule for the
policy instruments with ``several desirable features`` as an
example of ``a general strategy for conducting monetary policy.``

The finding that predictable rules-based monetary policy is
essential for good economic performance comes from research by
many people and from practical experience over many years in the
United States and other countries. My own research going back
more than four decades supports this view, and such a view has
become embedded in macroeconomic theory.5 In the same conference
volume where the quoted words of George Shultz appear, other
economists, including Michael Bordo, Richard Clarida, John
Cochrane, Marvin Goodfriend, Jeffrey Lacker, Allan Meltzer, Lee
Ohanian, David Papell, and Charles Plosser, wrote about the
advantages of such a policy strategy; yet, most agreed that
during the past decade the Fed has either moved away from a rules-
based strategy or has not been clear about what the strategy is.

Of course, it is possible technically for the Fed to get back to
such a strategy, but it is difficult in practice. Long departures
from a rules-based strategy in the 1970s and in recent years
illustrate the difficulty. De jure central bank independence
alone has not prevented departures. De jure central bank
independence has been virtually unchanged in the past 50 years,
yet policy makers have varied their adherence to rules-based
policy. These variations point to the need for the Federal
Reserve Reform Act of 2015 which would require the Fed to set and
clarify its strategy for its policy instruments.

There is precedent for this type of Congressional oversight.
Legislation that appeared in the Federal Reserve Act from 1977 to
2000 required reporting of the ranges of the monetary aggregates.
The legislation did not specify exactly what the numerical
settings of these ranges should be, but the greater focus on the
money and credit ranges were helpful in the disinflation efforts
of the 1980s. When the requirement for reporting ranges for the
monetary aggregates was removed from the law in 2000, nothing was
put in its place. A legislative void was thus created concerning
reporting requirements and accountability. The proposed
legislative reform would help fill that void.

The United States Congress through the House Financial Services
Committee and Senate Banking Committee has responsibility for the
oversight of monetary policy in this strategic sense. Allan
Meltzer stressed this idea in a recent Senate Banking Committee
hearing,6 saying ``We need change to improve the oversight that
[Congress]. . .exercises over the Fed. . ..you need a rule which
says, look, you said you were going to do this, and you have not
done it. That requires an answer, and that I think is one of the
most important reasons why we need some kind of a rule.``

During the past year there has been extensive discussion and
debate in the Congress and in the media about the ideas
underlying the policy rules bill. Recently new economic research
at universities and think tanks has begun to address the issue.7
A bill with close similarities to the Federal Reserve Reform Act
of 2015 has been voted out of the Senate Banking Committee. The
Centennial Monetary Commission Act of 2015, which would establish
a Centennial Monetary Commission to study monetary policy, would
be a constructive way to bring this bring this research together,
and discuss it and expand it as necessary in a bipartisan context
and perhaps come to conclusion. It would be useful, for example,
to constructively address concerns about monetary policy and
reform proposals that have been raised during the past year. Let
me consider several of these concerns.

Fed Chair Janet Yellen testified8 that ``I don`t believe that the
Fed should chain itself to any mechanical rule.`` But the bill
does chain the Fed to any rule. The Fed would choose and describe
its own strategy, and it need not be mechanical. The Fed could
change the strategy if the world changed. It could deviate from
the strategy in a crisis if it explained why. It would still
serve as lender of last resort or take appropriate actions in the
event of a crisis. Moreover, a policy strategy or rule does not
require that any instrument of policy be fixed, but rather that
it flexibly adjusts up or down to economic developments in a
systematic and predictable way that can be explained.

Another stated concern with policy rules legislation is that the
Fed would lose its independence. In my view, based on my own
experience in government, the opposite is more likely. A clear
public strategy helps prevent policy makers from bending under
pressure and sacrificing their institution`s independence.

Some commentators say that the bill would require the Fed to
follow a particular rule listed in the bill, but this is not the
case. The bill requires the Fed to describe how its strategy or
rule might differ from a ``reference rule,`` which happens to be
the Taylor rule. However, describing the difference between a
policy rule and this reference rule is a natural and routine task
for the Fed. In fact, many at the Fed already make such
comparisons including Chair Yellen.

The false claim that the bill would chain the Fed to the
reference rule leads to other questions. For example, Ranking
Member Gwen Moore asked Chair Janet Yellen in a hearing on July
15 whether the Fed would be able to react to the Greek crisis if
it were required to follow the Taylor rule. Chair Yellen noted
that that rule focusses on two variables and thus would not allow
such a reaction. Leaving aside the question of whether the Fed
should have reacted to the Greek crisis, the legislation would
not have prevented it from doing so, because the Fed would choose
the rule and it could deviate from it.

Some say that uncertainty about the output gap makes any rule
that depends on the gap inferior to discretion. But uncertainty
about the output gap is just as much a problem for discretion as
it is for policy rules.

Another critique is that the zero bound on the interest rate
means that an interest rate rule is no longer useful. Wasn`t that
the reason that the Fed deviated from rules-based policy in
recent years? It was certainly not a reason in 2003-2005 and it
is not a reason now, because the zero bound is not binding. It
appears that there was a short period in 2009 when zero was
clearly binding. But the zero bound is not a new thing in
economics research. Policy rule design research took that into
account long ago. One approach was to recognize that in such a
situation one should simply keep money growth steady rather than
embarking on a purely discretionary policy such as quantitative
easing.

There is also the concern that there are many rules or strategies
to choose from. There are many different types of personal
display devices, but that does mean they are all useless. Some
policy strategies are better than others, and it makes perfect
sense for researchers and policy makers to be looking for new and
better ones. Some people have suggested focusing on nominal GDP.
I do not think adding housing prices or the stock market to a
rule makes much sense, but with the policy rules legislation it
is the job of the Fed to decide.

Some of the recent objections to predictable policy rules and the
enabling legislation go to the heart of an old debate about rules
versus discretion. Lawrence Summers raised this one: ``I think
about my doctor. Which would I prefer: for my doctor`s advice, to
be consistently predictable, or for my doctor`s advice to be
responsive to the medical condition with which I present? Me, I`d
rather have a doctor who most of the time didn`t tell me to take
some stuff, and every once in a while said I needed to ingest
some stuff into my body in response to the particular problem
that I had. That would be a doctor who`s [advice], believe me,
would be less predictable.``

This line of argument in favor of pure discretion appeals to an
all-knowing expert, a doctor who does not perceive the need for,
and does not use, a set of guidelines, but who once in a while in
an unpredictable way says to ingest some stuff. But as in
economics, there has been progress in medicine over the years.
And much progress has been due to doctors using checklists.
Experience shows that checklists are invaluable for preventing
mistakes, getting good diagnoses and appropriate treatments. Of
course doctors need to exercise judgement in implementing
checklists, but if they start winging it or skipping steps the
patients usually suffer. Experience and empirical studies show
that a checklist-free medicine is wrought with dangers just as a
rules-free monetary policy.

Another line of argument is that you do not really need a rule or
strategy for the instruments of policy. All you really need for
effective policy making is a goal, such as an inflation target
and an employment target. In medicine, it would be the goal of a
healthy patient. The rest of policymaking is doing whatever you
as an expert, or you as an expert with models, thinks needs to be
done with the instruments. You do not need to articulate or
describe a strategy, a decision rule, or a contingency plan for
the instruments. If you want to hold the interest rate well below
the rule-based strategy that worked well during the Great
Moderation, as the Fed did in 2003-2005, then it`s ok as long as
you can justify it at the moment in terms of the goal.

Ben Bernanke and others have called this approach ``constrained
discretion.``10 It is an appealing term, and it may be
constraining discretion in some sense, but it is not inducing or
encouraging a rule or a strategy. Simply having a specific
numerical goal is not a rule for the instruments of policy; it is
not a strategy; in my view, it ends up being all tactics. I think
the evidence shows that relying solely on constrained discretion
has not worked for monetary policy.

I would be happy to answer questions about this testimony on
Section 2 of Federal Reserve Reform Act of 2015, the Centennial
Monetary Commission Act of 2015 or any other questions that you
may have about the Federal Reserve reform proposals.
