Body




Statement of Andrew P. Kelly
Director, Center on Higher Education Reform
American Enterprise Institute

Committee on Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions

May 20, 2015

Introduction

Good morning, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, and thank you for giving
me the opportunity to share my views on the concept of risk-
sharing in higher education.

My name is Andrew Kelly and I am the director of the Center on
Higher Education Reform at the American Enterprise Institute, a
non-profit, non-partisan public policy research organization
based here in Washington, DC. My comments today are my own and do
not necessarily reflect the views of AEI.

I`m here today to discuss how the federal government can give the
colleges and universities it helps to finance a greater stake in
student success and college affordability. Specifically, the
question before us today is how a risk-sharing policy, where
colleges would bear some financial responsibility for a portion
of the federal loans that their students do not repay, might
better align the incentives of colleges, students, and taxpayers.
This idea has received increasing attention from both sides of
the aisle of late, and it is an opportune time to discuss it.

Today I will start by briefly outlining the problems with our
current approach to determining student aid eligibility,
explaining the principles of risk-sharing and why I believe it
would represent an improvement over the status quo, and
discussing basic policy design principles the Committee could
consider. I will conclude with some important caveats that we
must keep in mind.

Over the past half-century, federal higher education policy has
been focused on ensuring college access for qualified students
who would otherwise be unable to attend due to financial
constraints. To achieve this goal, the federal government makes
available grants and loans to any eligible student pursuing
education after high school.

This is an admirable objective. After all, the average return to
completing a degree or certificate remains robust, lower-income
Americans who earn a degree are more likely to experience upward
mobility, and a more-educated population helps grow the economy.

Evidence suggests that federal need-based grants encourage
enrollment among low-income students, and the marked increase in
college access at all income levels reflects the expansion of the
federal student aid system. In 1972, the year the Pell Grant was
created, 49 percent of recent high school graduates went on to
enroll in postsecondary education; by 2012, 66 percent had done
so.

However, federal policy has paid less attention to whether these
student aid investments promote student success and encourage
colleges to keep their tuition affordable. On each of these
measures, the trends are far from encouraging. Research shows
that college completion rates have declined over time,4 and just
over half of the students who start a degree or certificate
graduate within six years. Completion rates are much lower among
disadvantaged students.

Meanwhile, the sticker price of tuition at public four-year
colleges has more than tripled since the early 1980s. Though net
prices have increased more slowly, family incomes have not kept
pace, putting college out of reach for many and forcing others to
take on large amounts of debt.

In 2013, 70 percent of graduates from public and nonprofit
colleges had student loan debt, and the average borrower owed
just under $30,000. Those who take on debt but do not graduate
often have the most difficulty repaying their loans. The
effective delinquency rate on student loans, after excluding
students who are not required to make payments, is over 30
percent, about as high as it was on subprime mortgages during the
housing crisis.

Borrowing itself is not inherently bad: if a loan enables an
individual to pursue a high-quality postsecondary credential that
he or she would not otherwise have been able to afford, then the
loan is advancing economic opportunity. But when students borrow
for programs that are unlikely to deliver a positive return on
investment, it is easy for them to find themselves in the worst
place of all: saddled with debt but without a credential to
advance their career. The ranks of these borrowers are growing.

Faced with these trends, policymakers are now asking how federal
student aid policy can encourage colleges to provide a quality
education at an affordable price.

Leaders of both parties have acknowledged that these are not
entirely, or even mostly, questions about how much we spend, but
about how we change the incentives that existing programs create
for colleges.

There is a growing consensus in states and at the federal level
that improving student success and college affordability requires
reforms that better align the incentives of institutions and
students. A host of initiatives, from outcomes-based funding in
the states to President Obama`s college ratings to the recent
white papers released by this committee, fit under this broad
category.

A key question is whether existing federal policies provide
colleges with enough of a stake in student success. To be sure,
the policymakers who designed the student aid system a half-
century ago did not ignore these questions. They set up a three-
pronged quality assurance regime known as the ``triad`` to govern
eligibility for federal aid programs.

Today, institutions must be accredited by a recognized
organization, authorized by any state they operate in, and must
meet federal standards for financial viability, student loan
default rates, and, in the case of for-profit institutions, the
proportion of their revenue that comes from non-federal sources
(the ``90/10 rule``).

Above these quality assurance standards, market competition is
supposed to discipline providers. Policymakers decided to give
aid directly to students as a portable voucher, allowing them to
``vote with their feet`` and reward schools that offer
affordable, high-quality programs. In the aggregate, these
choices are supposed to hold eligible colleges and universities
accountable for their performance.

These quality assurance mechanisms have failed to protect
consumers or taxpayers, however. Low levels of consumer
information about costs and quality, coupled with a dearth of
clear, comparable data on those dimensions, blunts market
accountability. Basic information on outof- pocket costs, the
percentage of students who complete a degree, or the likely
return on investment at different programs is incomplete or
unavailable. Programs with high price tags and poor outcomes
continue to attract students and taxpayer dollars.

The triad has also proven ineffective in its gate-keeping role.
According to the most recent data available from the Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), over 1,300
aideligible two- and four-year colleges graduated less than 30
percent of their first-time, full-time students in 150 percent of
the normal time to degree. When it comes to finishing on time,
more than 750 four-year colleges had four-year completion rates
of 20 percent or lower. Similarly, among those institutions
receiving federal loan dollars, nearly 500 schools had three-year
Cohort Default Rates (CDR) of 25 percent or higher in 2014.

Each part of the triad has its own shortcomings. Accreditation
reviews rely on faculty from other institutions to evaluate their
peers, creating a conflict of interest. It is also a binary
measure, and the high stakes of revoking a school`s accreditation
mean it rarely happens. A Government Accountability Office (GAO)
analysis found that just 1 percent of accredited institutions
lost their accreditation over a four and a half year period.
State regulations vary considerably across the country, and few
states authorize institutions on the basis of their student
outcomes.

At the federal level, the primary mechanism for holding colleges
accountable the Cohort Default Rate successfully curbed the worst
instances of fraud and abuse when first introduced in the 1990s.
But the policy is flawed.

First, it is easily gamed. So long as students default outside of
the three-year window, colleges are held harmless for that
failure, creating incentive to get students just over that three-
year threshold. Indeed, when the Department of Education shifted
from two-year to three-year default rates, loan performance was
much worse in the threeyear window. The average default rate
jumped 4.6 percentage points.

Second, the rule is binary in nature: colleges whose default
rates are just below the federal standard (40 percent in a given
year or 30 percent over three consecutive years) continue to have
full access to federal aid programs. Those institutions that are
close to the threshold likely have incentive to improve in order
to avoid sanction in the future. But the mass of institutions
with default rates that are high but still below the thresholds
bear no responsibility for loans that go into default. There is
nothing magical about the thresholds, yet policy treats colleges
on either side of them completely differently.

Third, the binary element also makes the measure extremely high-
stakes; losing access to Title IV aid would essentially be a
death sentence for colleges. An entire industry has evolved to
help colleges manage their defaults within the three-year window,
and institutions have a host of opportunities to challenge and
appeal the Department of Education`s ruling. And policymakers
have been reticent to sanction schools under the policy. Just
eight institutions were subject to sanction in 2013. This past
year, the Department of Education revised the default rates of a
subset of institutions on the basis of concerns about inadequate
loan servicing, effectively saving them from sanction.

Thus, existing policies have given rise to a system where
colleges that effectively originate student loans bear little of
the risk if borrowers are then unable to pay those loans back.
This creates little incentive for poorly performing colleges to
keep tuition low, enroll students who are likely to be
successful, or change institutional practice so as to maximize
student success.

To be clear: student success is a joint product of student effort
and institutional practice. And institutions have only limited
control over whether students arrive prepared for college, how
much students decide to borrow above the cost of tuition, or
their behavior during and after college. I discuss these caveats
below.

But evidence suggests that colleges do have an effect on student
success; that institutions who adopt research-based
interventions can improve retention and completion rates; and
that it is possible to contain costs without sacrificing quality.
The question is how to structure federal policies to encourage
colleges to focus effort and resources on these goals.

Risk-sharing

A risk-sharing policy would change these incentives for all
colleges. Risk-sharing here refers to a policy that would require
all colleges who participate in the federal loan program to
retain some portion of the risk that their students will be
unable to repay their loans. Specifically, colleges would be on
the hook financially to pay back a fraction of the loans that
their students fail to repay. In the parlance of other lending
markets, colleges would have some ``skin in the game`` when it
comes to student loans.

The intent of such a policy is to give all colleges not just
those with the highest default rates stronger incentive to
consider changes to institutional practice, resource allocation,
and tuition pricing that would lower the probability that
borrowers experience problems in repaying their loans. Risk-
sharing is thus designed to change institutional behavior by
holding colleges accountable for student outcomes, not dictating
specific changes from Washington. Colleges would maintain the
flexibility to figure out how best to accomplish student success
goals.

How might such a policy play out in higher education? It is worth
noting that the concept of risksharing has received significant
attention in other lending markets, particularly in the context
of home loans. Evidence from the period before and after the
financial crisis suggests that the loan portfolios of mortgage
lenders who had some skin in the game as little as three percent
of the risk performed better than those who did not. In a
comparative study of loan performance in the Veteran`s Affairs
(VA) and Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loan programs,
researchers at the Urban Institute found that VA loans were less
likely to default than FHA loans.

The researchers hypothesize that the fact that lenders in the VA
program have skin in the game likely explains some of the
difference in performance (though they caution that they
establish a correlation, not causation).

Because similar variation is not present in federal student
loans, it is more difficult to project how this policy would play
out in American higher education. But a recent paper by Temple
University economist Douglas Webber attempted to simulate how
different types of institutions might respond to a risk-sharing
system, namely whether they would price risk-sharing into their
tuition costs. Webber`s simulation suggests that a risk-sharing
system where colleges had to pay back 20 percent or 50 percent of
defaulted loans would ``bring about a sizable reduction in
student loan debt,`` though at the cost of ``modestly higher
tuition rates.``

Webber shows that if colleges were able to reduce their default
rates even 10 percent, the reduction in loan debt would be even
larger. Webber`s simulation of a 10 percent reduction in default
rates is likely a conservative estimate of the extent to which
proactive institutions could improve loan repayment rates.
Indeed, there are a number of strategies colleges could pursue in
this regard.

First, broad-access colleges could raise entrance standards and
be more careful about enrolling students who have little chance
of success. This would be an improvement in consumer protection;
students should not enroll at an institution that cannot serve
them effectively. But such a response also has consequences for
access that I discuss below.

Second, some colleges will likely change their pricing and
enrollment policies to minimize the number of students that wind
up with debt but no degree. One approach is to implement a free
or low-cost ``trial period`` that allows students to test the
waters before they take on any debt. For instance, in the
aftermath of the Obama Administration`s effort to regulate for-
profit colleges, Kaplan University introduced a free, three-week
trial. Another option is to have students start taking courses
with a lower-cost provider before transferring those credits to
the home institution. Western Governors University has partnered
with online course provider StraighterLine to provide this kind
of low-risk onramp for prospective students.21

Third, and most importantly, colleges will have incentive to
restructure the student experience in ways that maximize student
success. The most effective way to help students avoid repayment
problems is to help them complete a credential with labor market
value. A series of rigorous, randomized evaluations has provided
evidence that different interventions can raise retention and
completion rates personalized coaching, performance-based grant
aid, full-time enrollment in a ``structured pathway.`` A
comprehensive intervention that combined many of these strategies
doubled graduation rates among remedial students at the City
University of New York.

Improvements are possible, provided colleges have an incentive to
adopt evidence-based strategies. Having skin in the game could
provide that incentive.

Design Principles

There are a number of design principles and caveats that the
Committee could consider when thinking about the structure of a
risk-sharing policy. I start with four design principles and
conclude with two important caveats.

First, leaders might consider moving away from cohort default
rates as the key measure. On the one hand, putting institutions
on the hook for a fraction of defaulted dollars is transparent,
simple, and clearly pegged to a defined outcome. But default
rates are highly imperfect measures of institutional quality and
loan performance. Options like forbearance, deferment, and
incomebased repayment help students avoid defaulting even if they
are not making progress in paying back their loans. As an
alternative, policymakers could use a measure of repayment
progress, such as cohort`s loan balance that remains unpaid after
the standard ten-year repayment period.

Second, in terms of the structure of penalties, the simplest
approach would be to charge institutions a flat percentage of non-
performing loans, perhaps excluding institutions whose repayment
rates are above a certain threshold. For example, institutions
might pay a flat percentage of a cohort`s loan balance that
remains at the end of the standard 10-year repayment window.
Alternatively, a sliding scale of penalties that increased as
repayment rates worsened would punish poor-performing
institutions more severely, but policymakers would want to avoid
a system that ratchets up penalties at particular thresholds in a
way that creates large discontinuities.

Third, while it is difficult to forecast in advance, it is my
opinion that risk-sharing penalties need not be particularly
large to get the attention of schools. One study of the mortgage
market found marked differences in loan performance with risk
retention as low as 3 percent. In higher education, the system
should be designed to provide schools with an incentive to focus
on student success, but penalties should not be so large as to
summarily put schools out of business simply because they have
cash flow issues.

Fourth, it would be ideal to create a system that is simpler,
more transparent, and that applies equally across all
institutions regardless of tax status or other factors such as
borrowing rates. We should have high expectations for all
institutions, and a risk-sharing system can help achieve that
goal so long as it is not riddled with provisions that exempt
particular types of institutions.

Fifth, there are clearly many factors outside an institution`s
control such as economic recessions. Tying the risk-sharing
formula to the national unemployment rate, for instance, and
exempting a fraction of non-performing loans from an
institution`s calculation based on that index, would help account
for this risk.

Caveats

Now for the caveats. The most obvious criticism is that risk-
sharing will reduce access for lowincome students. This is a
likely outcome at some schools, and must be taken seriously. But
it`s important to note that, in many cases, encouraging
institutions to think twice about enrolling students that are
unlikely to be successful is not necessarily a bad thing.

For years, colleges have knowingly enrolled such students in
order to capture additional student aid money, a practice that
members of this committee criticized during prior hearings on for-
profit colleges.

It is also important to note that these students would still have
access to institutions where they are more likely to be
successful. Federal policy should encourage students to enroll in
institutions that are prepared to serve them.

But it is true that increased selectivity could keep out students
that would benefit from schooling on the basis of their
characteristics. Therefore, policymakers should consider offering
institutions a bonus for every Pell Grant recipient they
graduate. Such a reward would help balance the potential risk of
enrolling low-income students.

Colleges also have justifiable concerns that risk-sharing would
hold them accountable for behaviors they have no control over.
For instance, colleges cannot limit how much students are allowed
to borrow over the cost of tuition, meaning a poorly-designed
risk-sharing system would put them on the hook for loans that
were not used to pay tuition. In light of this, a risk-sharing
policy should only hold colleges responsible for a portion of the
total sum of unpaid loan dollars.

The penalty formula could multiply that sum by the ratio between
tuition and living costs for that cohort. Similarly, colleges
should not be punished for ineffective loan servicing.
Alternatively, the Committee might consider giving schools the
power to limit student borrowing under certain circumstances. For
guidance on this issue, policymakers could look to the Department
of Education`s current experimental sites project that empowers
selected colleges to limit borrowing.

I appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback. I am
enthusiastic about the Committee`s focus on this topic and
believe a well-designed risk-sharing system can help to better
align the incentives of institutions and their students.
