Body




Statement of James C. Capretta
Senior Fellow, Ethics and Public Policy Center
American Enterprise Institute

Committee on Senate Budget

April 27, 2016

Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me to participate in this hearing.

The nation is facing serious fiscal challenges and has been for
many years. The Congressional Budget Office`s (CBO) most recent
long-term budget projections indicate that accumulated federal
debt will reach 100 percent of the nation`s gross domestic
product (GDP) in about two decades` time. This is an
unprecedented deterioration in the nation`s fiscal position. From
1957 to 2008, federal debt never exceeded 50 percent of GDP, but
it now exceeds 70 percent of GDP. Over the next decade alone 2017
to 2026 the CBO estimates that the federal government will borrow
another $9.3 trillion, and that assumes spending on national
security will fall to levels not seen since before World War II.
In my testimony today, I will discuss three aspects of the
current process that require attention and reform:

1. The uncontrolled growth of mandatory spending;

2. The importance of keeping focus on long-term fiscal policy;
and

3. The absence of a process for facilitating legislative and
executive agreement on the budget.

The Role of Mandatory Spending

The fundamental problem with the nation`s finances is the runaway
expense of mandatory spending programs. In 1962, the federal
government spent 4.7 percent of GDP on benefit transfers and
other automatic spending programs, such as Social Security,
unemployment insurance, and welfare support. By 2013, spending on
these mandatory programs had risen to nearly 13 percent of GDP.

Instead of forcing policymakers to confront the problem, the
current budget process shifts financial pressures off of
mandatory spending and onto other portions of the federal budget.
As spending on entitlement programs soared since the early 1960s,
funding for annually appropriated (or ``discretionary``)
accounts, especially defense, fell precipitously, from 12.3
percent of GDP in 1962 to 7.2 percent in 2013.

Sooner or later, and probably sooner, the unsustainable nature of
the current state of fiscal affairs will force change. A crisis
might be precipitated by an international event that exposes the
current defense budget as woefully inadequate to confront the
threats to the nation`s security. A quick upward adjustment in
defense spending could set in motion changes in perceptions that
lead to large increases in interest rates. It would be far better
for the country if elected leaders did not wait for a crisis to
act but instead confronted the nation`s fiscal problems with more
foresight and planning. The changes in programs would be more
gradual and more carefully designed.

Keeping Focus on Long-Term Fiscal Policy

The nation`s fiscal position has deteriorated significantly in
recent years, with large deficits and mounting debt. But the most
significant threat is not short-term but mid- to long-term.
According to the CBO`s latest long-term projections, federal debt
will never again return to the postwar norm. Instead, the
national debt will rise inexorably and exceed 100 percent of GDP
in 2040. The primary cause of unending federal deficits is
rapidly rising entitlement spending. By 2040, the CBO expects
spending on the major entitlement programs (Social Security,
Medicare, and Medicaid), plus the subsidies made available by the
Affordable Care Act, to total 14.2 percent of GDP, up from about
10 percent today.

That is an immense shift of resources toward consumption-oriented
entitlement spending. Policymakers need to keep their eyes on the
long run and the steps necessary to begin closing the immense gap
between expected revenue and expected spending. It would be truly
unfortunate if Congress and the president pursued a short-term
fiscal plan without also thinking through what needs to be done
over the longer term. The result could very easily be a temporary
reduction in the budget deficit that is quickly overwhelmed by
longer-term spending trends.

Unfortunately, the current budget process does not provide
policymakers with a clear view of the long-term challenges, nor
does it facilitate the kind of decision making that would improve
the long-term fiscal outlook.

An Elusive Federal Budget

A related problem is that the executive and legislative branches
of our government have parallel budget processes that do not
necessarily result in a consensus plan. Congress expresses its
views on the budget in the congressional budget resolution (CBR).
CBRs are not laws. Rather, they are concurrent resolutions, which
means they are relevant only for Congress. Presidents are in no
way bound by them and in fact have often denounced them as
containing misplaced priorities. Of course, presidents prepare
and submit a budget plan to Congress every year, and those too
are often denounced as inadequate by members of the House and
Senate.

The parallel budgetary processes of the executive and legislative
branches are a reflection of our constitutional structure. The co-
equal branches of government each have a substantial role over
the federal budget, and there is no legal requirement that they
ever fully come to an agreement with each other. Indeed, with
some exceptions, it can be said that the federal government never
truly operates within a budget because the legislative and
executive branches rarely agree on one.

This structure has practical consequences. It is possible, and
happens frequently, that Congress will proceed based on one
budgetary framework, defined by a CBR, that differs substantially
from the framework the president supports. The differences
between the two branches get addressed, if they do at all, only
when actual spending or tax legislation that is a product of the
CBR framework makes its way all the way through the legislative
process and reaches the president`s desk. At that point, the
president can sign or veto the legislation. Usually, if there is
an ongoing disagreement, the anticipation of a veto is enough to
bring the entire process to a standstill. This is an important
reason why there are regular, drawn-out budget fights between
Congress and the president. The two branches spend most of the
year working from different budgetary plans, and then there is a
mad scramble to provide an ad hoc resolution to the disagreement
to keep the government operating.

But even if an ad hoc process works temporarily, that is very
different from having in place a budget framework that lasts
multiple years and provides financial structure and stability to
government finances. The current process does not apply any
countervailing pressure to offset the institutional and political
tendencies toward budget stalemate that are built directly into
our constitutional order.

The Joint Budget Resolution

A possible, partial antidote for budgetary drift, rising
mandatory spending, and neglect of long-term challenges might be
found with a joint budget resolution (JBR). Unlike a CBR, a joint
resolution must be agreed to by the president and therefore is a
law. It thus has the potential to facilitate, and perhaps even
pressure, the legislative and executive branches into coming to
an agreement on key budgetary aggregates that would govern
decisions by both branches later in the budget process.

There are numerous ways to provide for the consideration of JBRs,
but the most straightforward option would be to build on the
current process. This can be accomplished by amending the current
Budget Act rules to allow an optional JBR ``spin-off`` from any
CBR agreed to by both the House and Senate. Congress would not
have to pursue a JBR, but if it did so legislation would
automatically get sent to the president upon adoption of a CBR,
and the JBR would reflect the key budgetary aggregates: total
discretionary spending, total mandatory spending, revenues,
deficits, and debt. The president could then either approve or
veto the legislation.

If the president vetoed the JBR, the process would revert back to
what is in place today under the Budget Act. Congress could
proceed under the terms of the budget resolution, and engagement
with the executive branch would be postponed until later in the
year, when the spending and tax bills flowing from that budget
were transmitted to the president.

If, however, the president agreed to the JBR and signed it into
law, the budget framework contained within it would have the
force of law, and both branches would be bound by it.

A JBR covering the full budget would have the capacity to adjust
the caps on discretionary spending, impose discipline on
mandatory spending, and provide a target for revenues. This would
ensure that Congress and the president truly engage in budgetary
decision making. There would be clear trade-offs between the key
budget categories, as well as projected deficit spending and
debt. Congress and the president could choose to put more
pressure on mandatory spending programs and thus perhaps ease the
pressure on discretionary accounts, or vice versa.

Although ideally a JBR should cover all aspects of federal budget
policy, it would be possible to start with an interim step of
adjustments just to the discretionary caps. The CBR would operate
as it does today, except that, upon adoption of a conference
report on a CBR, Congress would have the option of sending to the
president a JBR providing for adjustments to the discretionary
caps at the levels provided for in the CBR. This interim step
would be important because it would empower the Budget Committees
in the House and Senate; they would become the committees
directly responsible for establishing these binding caps a first
step toward a real budget process that would bind both the
legislative and executive branches.

Enforcement

The JBR concept works only if a sensible enforcement system is
attached to it. The caps on discretionary spending are enforced
with a well-established mechanism a sequester of spending above
the cap amount.

Enforcing discipline on mandatory spending is of course a more
difficult matter.

There are several ways to go about this, but whatever approach is
chosen should:

-- Provide an incentive for Congress to enact reform legislation
that avoids the need for an enforced change in spending;

-- Set in motion balanced and reasonable adjustments focused on
many programs, not just an isolated few; and

-- Allow for adjustments to occur over a period of years rather
than all at once.

Congress could also choose other approaches to enforcement, such
as focusing on the cancellation of future spending increases or
planned program liberalizations scheduled to occur in future
years.

Toward a Long-Term Budget

While a JBR with sensible enforcement would be a significant
improvement over the current process, it will not, by itself,
solve the problem of inattention to the long term. An important
first step toward addressing that problem would be to get
agreement in the legislative and executive branches on how to
measure the long-term fiscal obligations of the government. That
information could then be used to inform current legislative
debates and eventually used to spur legislative action.

One approach would be to establish a uniform definition of the
federal government`s long-term unfunded liabilities. In general,
this would mean calculating the present value of expected future
tax receipts and expected future spending commitments. Long-term
forecasts are already done annually for both the Social Security
and Medicare programs, and so a large portion of the federal
budget can be assessed on this basis with current information.
(The latest projections indicate the combined unfunded
liabilities for these programs is more than $40 trillion.) These
forecasts could be supplemented with assessments of other parts
of the budget, especially those that create long-term obligations
on behalf of the government, such as pension programs (civil and
military and the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation) and
health benefits.

Once a common measure is established, it could be used to assess
legislation in Congress and perhaps also be incorporated into a
JBR. For instance, the budget process could be amended to require
CBO assessments of how significant new budgetary legislation
would alter the unfunded liabilities calculation. Bills that
would increase those liabilities could be ruled out of order and
thus pulled from consideration unless a supermajority of the
members chose to override the rule.

In addition, a CBR could ``reconcile`` the committees with
jurisdiction over the major programs with large unfunded
liabilities and thus set in motion privileged legislation to
narrow the fiscal gap with corrective legislation. This kind of
legislation would not need to show deficit reduction over a 10-
year period but over some longer time frame, such as 25 or 50
years.

Conclusion

The United States is facing serious fiscal challenges that will
not be easy to overcome. The sharing of budgetary responsibility
by two co-equal branches of the federal government makes large-
scale and painful change particularly difficult to achieve.

Moreover, budget process reforms cannot make political
disagreements vanish. But, if political leaders are inclined to
search for an agreement on the budget, a better process could
make it easier for them to reach that goal.