Body




Statement of Donald F. Kettl
Professor of Public Policy
University of Maryland

Committee on Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
Subcommittee on Federal Spending Oversight and Emergency
Management

June 10, 2015

Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, it`s a genuine
honor to appear before you and to share my perspective on the
problem of cutting waste in government. I`ve been working in the
field of public management and budgeting for 40 years and, over
that time, have had the chance to examine closely the best
practices in the United States and around the world in building
strategies to reduce government`s cost and to improve its
effectiveness. There`s never been a time when smart work on these
problems has been more needed, and the Subcommittee`s work could
not be better timed.

There are two fundamental kinds of wasteful government spending.
One is doing things that shouldn`t be done or that shouldn`t be
done by government. That`s fundamentally a political judgment
shaped, as the nation`s founders intended, by the good women and
men who work in this building. There are important new
contributions to these judgments through the movement to bring
more and better evidence to government decisions, through
strategies like ``Moneyball for Government,`` which Senators
Kelly Ayotte and Mark Warner have championed. Supporting this
effort is legislation like the Government Performance and Results
Modernization Act of 2010 and management reforms of both
Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, which have brought
sharper analysis to the measurement of government performance. At
the core, however, the question of what government should do is a
political question that must be answered by our politically
elected officials.

The other kind of wasteful government spending is doing poorly
those things that government must do. Once Congress passes
legislation and the president signs it, there is an obligation in
law and a promise to citizens to ``take Care that the Laws be
faithfully executed,`` as the president`s oath of office in the
Constitution puts it. We should see that the laws are executed
effectively, efficiently, and accountably. Too often, as we know
all too well, this doesn`t happen. That`s wasteful government
spending we can indeed, we must do something about.

There are things that virtually everyone agrees government must
do: providing quality health care to veterans, managing Medicare
and Medicaid effectively, ensuring the safety of the food supply,
protecting critical infrastructure, and a host of other things.
It is imperative that we do better the things that government
must do. Nothing is more wasteful of taxpayer dollars, nor more
offensive to the social contract between citizens and government,
than to do these essential things poorly.

But here`s where we have a problem. As I wrote in the
January/February 2015 issue of The Washington Monthly, a
September 2014 Washington Post/ABC News poll shows that most
Americans believe that government fails too often. Of those
surveyed, 74 percent said they were dissatisfied or angry with
the way the federal government works. Another 23 percent were
satisfied but not enthusiastic. Those enthusiastic about the
federal government`s performance? Just 1 percent. We can and must
do better.

Government Programs That Work Well

In fact, however, much of government actually works pretty well,
most of the time. The Heritage Foundation points to ``the
breathtaking, long-term improvements in safety in the airline
industry,`` with tough, smart work by the National Transportation
Safety Board leading to just a single fatal accident on an
American airline since 2009, when a commuter jet crashed near
Buffalo. For all the (often overblown) concerns about the long-
term fiscal strength of Social Security, the bureaucracy that
actually administers the program, the Social Security
Administration, makes monthly payments to sixty-four million
Americans with an accuracy rate of more than 99 percent and
administrative costs that are (at 0.7 percent) but a fraction of
those of private pension plans. Harvard University researchers
found that stronger government regulations for air quality have
led to longer lives. Even at the troubled Veterans Health
Administration, a new technology system shrank the claims backlog
by 60 percent.

Government usually gets only the hard problems the puzzles that
the private sector cannot or will not tackle, or that the private
sector itself creates. In 2009, the United States found itself
the majority stockholder in General Motors and pumped billions
into Chrysler. Government bailouts saved an insurance company
(AIG) and a bank (Citigroup). With its $49.5 billion bailout, the
feds saved GM and millions of jobs, lost just $11.2 billion in
the turnaround, and got out of the car business by the end of
2013. The government actually made money $22.7 billion on the AIG
bailout and another $15 billion on Citigroup, far offsetting its
auto-industry loss. Six years after the government launched these
bailouts, it`s still staggering to imagine how bad things would
have gotten if the government had left private enterprise to
itself. And these weren`t aberrations. Again and again over the
years, Washington has bailed out companies deemed vital to the
economy, like Lockheed in 1971, Chrysler in 1980, and the entire
airline industry after 9/11. Each time, the actions saved the
companies and Washington made a profit on its investments. A huge
part of government works pretty well most of the time, as we take
for granted every time safe drinking water comes out of the tap.

What To Do About Programs that Don`t

But, too often, important programs do not work well. These are
problems that cost untold billions in taxpayer dollars. Most
importantly, however, these are problems that can be fixed.

The ``high-risk list`` prepared every two years by the U.S.
Government Accountability Office provides clues about the scale
of the problem and how to solve it. The 2015 high-risk list
contains 32 programs especially prone to fraud, waste, abuse, and
mismanagement (see Table 1). They are, without exception,
programs that must be managed well and where the failure to do so
wastes money. So this is an important place to look for clues.
Several points are important here.

1. Government`s ongoing problems of wasteful spending share a
small number of root causes. My careful review of GAO`s high-risk
list (see Figure 1) reveals that the wide and varied collection
of programs share a relatively small handful of root causes:

-- Managing boundaries. No problem that matters can fit within a
single organization. Reducing waste requires that we build strong
bridges among those who share responsibility for managing a
program. Medicare and Medicaid are only as good as the bridges
they build among those who deliver care. Defense spending depends
on good partnerships between government`s procurement officials
and the army of private contractors who supply most of the goods
and services. Food safety requires a strong chain that stretches
from food producers to processors and distributors, often across
international borders. Boundary-management is increasingly
essential in ensuring effective management and reducing
government waste.

-- Performance metrics. Measuring progress in reducing wasteful
spending requires a yardstick. The government-wide effort
prompted by the Government Performance and Results Modernization
Act, along with the initiatives of the Bush and Obama
administration. NASA, for example, reduced cost increases and
missed schedules by enhancing its performance management system.

Information systems. Delivering the services that citizens want
and making sure we don`t pay for costs that are illegal is a
keystone to reducing wasteful spending. Doing so requires good
information systems. For example, improving the systems for
payment of benefits due to veterans not only demands a robust
information system. It requires close integration of the
information systems in the Department of Defense (which track the
hazards to which members of the armed services were exposed and
the injuries they suffered) and in the Department of Veterans
Affairs (which track the post-service health care they receive).
When that doesn`t work well, costs go up and service goes down.

-- Technology management. Big improvements in government services
depend on technological advancements. But government has often
struggled with the development and deployment of new
technological systems. For example, the Federal Aviation
Administration will be spending as much as $22 billion by 2025 to
install the new NextGen air traffic control system. The FAA,
however, has struggled with the system`s development. The
government`s technological systems an $80 billion a year
investment has often been plagued by cost overruns and schedule
slippages. The government needs advanced technology to solve many
of the nation`s most important problems, but failure to manage
that technology can lead to significant wasteful spending.

-- Human capital. All of these areas depend on enough smart
government managers, in the right places at the right times with
the right skills. The GAO has identified human capital problems
in two-thirds of its high-risk programs. In fact, human capital
and talent management are the essential foundation for solving
every one of government`s toughest problems to the point that GAO
has identified strategic human capital management as a high-risk
area all its own. We surely need to introduce more flexibility in
the government`s workforce, and we should not tolerate managers
who don`t perform. Far more important, however, we need to ensure
we have the right people with the right skills. The former is a
serious problem; the latter is far more likely to cause problems
of wasteful spending because it puts the entire system at risk.

Consider just the case of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. The agency is responsible for managing 20 percent of
the budget but has just 0.2 percent of all federal employees.
These employees manage the programs through a partnership with
private and nonprofit health care providers and by the private
intermediaries that administer the payments system. On average,
each employee is responsible for $144 million of CMS spending
(the agency`s $913 billion in outlays in fiscal year 2014,
divided by its 6,333 employees). The pattern is played out across
the government, with federal employees leveraging vast amounts of
taxpayer dollars and private sector energy. Nothing is more
wasteful than to fail to build the right workforce to get this
leverage right.

2. Solving these problems has the potential for dramatically
lowering wasteful spending. It`s impossible to know for sure just
how much of government`s spending is wasteful. But among the 32
programs on GAO`s high-risk list, the total is surely more than
$150 billion per year: $125 billion of improper payments, and at
least $25 billion in wasteful spending in the rest of the high-
risk list and throughout the rest of the government.

In March 2015, GAO estimated (GAO-15-482T) that the federal
government made $125 billion of improper payments in fiscal year
2014. That is an increase of 18 percent from the previous year.
The improper payments occurred in 124 programs, scattered among
22 different agencies, and the error rate in payments was 4.5
percent in 2014, up from 4.0 percent in 2013. Two thirds of the
improper payments were in just three programs: Medicare,
Medicaid, and the Earned Income Tax Credit Program.

What are the root causes of these improper payments? In general,
we don`t have strong enough information systems to detect
improper payments before they`re made. As a result, the
government gets into a ``pay-and-chase`` mode, of trying to track
down and recover payments that never should have been made in the
first place. Preventing that from happening requires linking
documentation for home health services with claims for payments
(in Medicare), documentation errors and inadequate state
information systems (in Medicaid), improper income reporting and
the issuance of checks before income verification (in the Earned
Income Tax Credit program), and claims for unemployment benefits
after individuals had returned to work (in the Unemployment
Insurance program).

The issues here track with the broader underlying issues in the
high-risk list:

--Managing boundaries

--Performance metrics

--Human capital

--Information systems

--Technology management

3. The problems are solvable. In the last 26 years, GAO has
removed 23 programs from the high-risk list (see Figure 2).
That`s powerful evidence that even the toughest problems of
government waste are solvable.

This is fundamentally good news. It`s unreasonable to expect zero
defects in the administrative of government programs. Government
does a large number of very hard and very complicated things,
from trying to reduce poverty to putting satellites into space.
And it`s not the case that there`s no waste in the private
sector: Ten percent of fast food ends up in the trash because it
doesn`t meet corporate standards for freshness. If fries aren`t
served within 7 minutes of cooking, McDonald`s restaurants throw
them out. But there`s no doubt that waste in government is too
high and that we can do better.

To do better, however, requires an action plan and strong backing
from the nation`s highest officials to support it. GAO`s high-
risk list measures the scale of the problem. But, far more
important, a close look at the underlying causes and the steps
that agencies have taken to remove their programs from the list
creates a new list of actionable items that can significantly
reduce wasteful spending in the federal government.

4. Reducing wasteful duplication and overlap. In addition to
these management improvements, we can also save substantial
taxpayer dollars by reducing duplicative and overlapping
governmental programs. GAO, for example, has estimated (GAO-15-
404SP) that the government could save $500 million per year by
changing the way the government reimburses cancer hospitals for
treatment of Medicare patients. The Environmental Protection
Agency and the Food and Drug Administration duplicate each
other`s work by inspecting the same laboratories. At least 42
different programs, in six different departments, provide non-
emergency medical transportation, and the savings for better
coordination are enormous. The Partnership for Public Service,
likewise, has found that shared public services, in which one
provider performs basic administrative services like information
technology, human resources, and financial management, can
provide better services and save taxpayers money (See Helping
Government Deliver II [2015]).

The basic lessons here are clear. Government can choose not to do
things, and that can save taxpayers money. But there are many
things that taxpayers citizens expect government to do, and to do
well. Nothing is more wasteful than failing to do well the things
that must be done. We can do better the things that government
must do. And that is an essential, irreplaceable step in reducing
wasteful spending in the federal government.
