Body




Statement of Seth G. Jones
Director, International Security and Defense Policy Center
RAND Corporation

Committee on House Financial Services

April 22, 2015

Chairman Fitzpatrick, Ranking Member Lynch, and members of the
Task Force to Investigate Terrorism Financing, thank you for
inviting me to testify at this hearing, ``A Survey of Global
Terrorism and Terrorist Financing.`` I commend the bipartisan
nature of the task force and its focus on U.S. efforts to
undermine terrorist financing. I have divided my comments into
three sections. The first provides an overview of the evolving
terrorist landscape, the second briefly examines terrorist
financing, and the third offers preliminary recommendations.

I. The Terrorist Threat

While there are a substantial number of terrorist groups today, I
will focus on three sets: al Qa`ida and its affiliates, Da`ish
and its affiliates, and Hezbollah. These sets include the groups
most threatening to the United States.

First, al Qa`ida is led by Ayman al-Zawahiri, the fiery Egyptian
who took over when Osama bin Laden was killed in 2011. Al
Qa`ida`s goal continues to be the establishment of an Islamic
caliphate that extends from Africa through the Middle East, South
Asia, and parts of the Pacific. From its base in Pakistan, al
Qa`ida`s primary strategy is to work with its affiliates such as
al Shabaab in Somalia, al Qa`ida in the Arabian Peninsula in
Yemen, al Qa`ida in the Islamic Maghreb in North Africa, Jabhat
al-Nusrah in Syria, and al Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent in
South Asia to overthrow local regimes. Zawahiri and his
colleagues seek to replace these governments with ones that
implement an extreme interpretation of Islamic law, or sharia.

Second, Da`ish also referred to as the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant, Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, Islamic State of
Iraq and al-Sham, or simply Islamic State has emerged as al
Qa`ida`s premier pan-Islamic Sunni competitor.1 Formerly al
Qa`ida in Iraq and then the Islamic State of Iraq, Da`ish broke
away from al Qa`ida in early 2014 after a series of personality,
ideological, organizational, and tactical disputes. Its leader,
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, could not bear to remain under the control
of al Qa`ida any more. And Da`ish`s anti-Shi`a attacks and brutal
executions, including beheadings and burnings, were too extreme
even for al Qa`ida. Similar to al Qa`ida, the goal of Da`ish is
to establish a radical Islamic caliphate. ``Rush O Muslims to
your state. Yes, it is your state,`` said Baghdadi in a recent
announcement, asking for volunteers to emigrate to Iraq and Syria
to fill key positions.2

Da`ish leaders have focused most of their operations in Iraq and
Syria. But they have also attempted to expand their network into
Africa, other countries in the Middle East, and Asia. In Nigeria,
for instance, the terrorist organization Boko Haram recently
pledged its allegiance to Da`ish. While the move might end up
nominally aiding the group with fundraising and recruitment, it
may also have been motivated by a desire to counter the recent
military setbacks that Boko Haram has suffered at the hands of
Nigerian and neighboring government forces. In Libya, Da`ish sent
emissaries in late 2014 to meet with extremist groups across the
country in an effort to establish a formal relationship. Da`ish
fighters now control key sections of Libyan cities like Sunt,
along the Mediterranean coast. In Egypt, leaders from the group
Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, based in the Sinai Peninsula, pledged their
loyalty to Da`ish in 2014. Da`ish has even established networks
and been involved in attacks in Afghanistan, including allegedly
perpetrating the April 2015 bombing at a Kabul Bank branch in
Jalalabad, which killed roughly three dozen civilians.

While Da`ish and al Qa`ida both want to establish Islamic
caliphates, they differ in important ways. Da`ish is less reliant
on funding from Persian Gulf donors and raises money from such
activities as smuggling oil, selling stolen goods, kidnapping and
extortion, and seizing bank accounts. While both movements view
Shi`a Muslims as infidels, Da`ish has regularly targeted Shi`a.
As its beheadings and burnings highlight, Da`ish operatives have
also been more inclined to conduct grisly attacks. A decade ago,
al Qa`ida leader Zawahiri wrote a letter to al Qa`ida in Iraq
extremists the predecessors of Da`ish warning that its gruesome
practices were counterproductive. ``Among the things which the
feelings of the Muslim populace who love and support you will
never find palatable also are the scenes of slaughtering the
hostages,`` Zawahiri scolded.3 The warnings went unheeded.

Other Sunni jihadist groups, such as the various Ansar al-Sharia
organizations in Libya, are members of neither Da`ish nor al
Qa`ida. Overall, the number of Sunni jihadist groups jumped 58
percent between 2010 and 2013.4 Libya, for instance, has become a
breeding ground for new groups after the collapse of its
government, which followed only four years after the overthrow of
Muammar Qaddafi. While Qaddafi`s demise and the July 2012
democratic elections represented a remarkable achievement for
political freedom, Libya faces massive challenges. The
bureaucracy is weak and well-armed militias control much of the
countryside and urban areas. Ansar al-Sharia Libya, a loose
collection of extremist groups, has emerged into this vacuum.
Based in such cities as Benghazi, Darnah, and Misratah, which hug
the Mediterranean coast, the various Ansar al-Sharia factions
seek to establish sharia in the country.

The number of extremist fighters has also increased dramatically,
more than doubling between 2010 and 2013 to a high of over
100,000 fighters. The wars in Syria and Iraq are the single most
important attraction for fighters. Extremist groups represent a
significant portion of the Syrian rebel manpower against the
Assad regime. The levels of extremist violence have also grown.
Among al Qa`ida affiliates alone, the number of attacks more than
doubled between 2010 and 2013. But most are not directed at the
United States or the West more broadly. Roughly 98 percent of
these attacks targeted local regimes and civilian populations
across such countries as Iraq, Syria, Yemen, and Somalia.5

This rise in Sunni extremism has been caused, in part, by a
growing weakness of governments across Africa and the Middle
East, where the Arab uprisings created an opportunity for
extremist groups to secure a foothold. Since 2010, governance
indicators in these areas have dropped markedly in such
categories as political stability, rule of law, and control of
corruption, according to World Bank data. The surge has also been
caused by the transnational movement of fighters trained on such
battlefields as Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. These
wars have provided a unique environment for extremists to pray,
share meals, train, socialize, and fight together. A growing
number of operatives have moved from these battlefields to new
locations in Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia.

Third, Hezbollah remains one of the most capable terrorist
organizations in the world. The group`s original aims were to
establish a radical Shi`a Islamist theocracy in Lebanon and to
destroy Israel. In recent years, Hezbollah has developed
proficient governance capabilities and participated in
parliamentary elections in Lebanon. It has also established cells
and infrastructure in place across the globe, from Latin America
and Africa to Europe and Asia. The 2006 war between Hezbollah and
Israel demonstrated that Hezbollah`s paramilitary wing, Al-
Muqawama al-Islamiyya, has evolved into an adept guerrilla army.
Hezbollah has also supported some Palestinian militants and
provided fighters to Syria in support of the Assad regime.
Hezbollah`s threat to the United States has varied over the
years. In 1983, for example, Hezbollah conducted a suicide attack
that killed 241 U.S. Marines, 58 French paratroopers, and 6
civilians at the U.S. and French barracks in Beirut. But
Hezbollah`s primary adversary remains Israel. This could change,
for example, with a deterioration in U.S.-Iranian relations.

II. Terrorist Financing

Based on the current terrorist landscape, this section will
briefly examine the financing of the groups highlighted in the
previous section.

A. Al Qa`ida and Its Affiliates: Core al Qa`ida has received
funding from multiple sources, such as private donations to front
charities. Some of al Qa`ida`s affiliates have increasingly
raised money through kidnapping, using an elaborate network of
middlemen and negotiators to exchange their captives for funds.
According to one assessment, al Qa`ida and its affiliates earned
at least $125 million in revenue from kidnappings between 2008
and 2014.6 This may be why the head of al Qa`ida in the Arabian
Peninsula, Nasir al-Wuhayshi, remarked: ``Kidnapping hostages is
an easy spoil, which I may describe as a profitable trade and a
precious treasure.``7

Overall, al Qa`ida affiliates finance themselves in different
ways. Al Qa`ida in the Arabian Peninsula, for example, has
traditionally funded itself through several mechanisms. The first
is through zakat, or philanthropic religious donations to al
Qa`ida-connected collectors. A second is through mosque
collections, though this has been regulated to some extent at
larger mosques in Saudi Arabia. Although some donors may know how
their money is being used, others may believe their donations are
used by more legitimate Islamic charities. A third funding
mechanism is through a wide range of licit and illicit
activities, such as running farms and seizing bank accounts. Over
the past year, for example, al Qa`ida in the Arabian Peninsula
has secured hundreds of thousands of dollars from raiding banks
in such Yemeni cities as Al Mukalla, a port city located on the
Gulf of Aden.

Al Shabaab derives much of its funding from its own activities,
particularly taxation of trade and other forms of business
occurring in, or passing through, its areas of control in
Somalia. The group`s control of the strategically important
southern port town of Kismayo prior to losing control of the city
in September 2012 was particularly important, including
facilitating its illicit trade in charcoal. Al Shabaab also
controls parts of the southern Kenyan border region, through
which there is a significant flow of smuggled goods. In addition,
the group is reported to tax farmers in its territory. Al Shabaab
has also received funding from its sympathizers based in Western
countries, including in the United States.

B. Da`ish and Its Affiliates:

Da`ish receives money from such activities as smuggling oil,
selling stolen goods, kidnapping and extortion, seizing bank
accounts, and smuggling antiquities. Alongside intimidation to
gain access to arms caches, Da`ish has previously extorted cash
and monetary tribute from other insurgent groups and community
leaders. Controlling the derivative fuels market (gasoline,
cooking gas, and diesel) has historicall been a particularly
lucrative sector for Da`ish, which has diverted shipments of fuel
to external markets (such as in Jordan and Syria) to take
advantage of higher prices there. Following Da`ish`s capture of
Mosul in June 2014, the group raided several banks in the city.
Meanwhile in Syria, Da`ish militants on July 3 seized control of
the Al-Omar oil field in the Deir ez Zour governorate. This oil
field the largest in Syria had been under the control of Jabhat
al-Nusrah. The seizure of oil and gas facilities has been a key
priority for Da`ish in its operations across both Syria and Iraq,
though Da`ish revenues from oil have recently been degraded. 10
See, for example, Patrick B. Johnston, ``Countering ISIL`s
Financing: Testimony Presented Before the House Financial
Services Committee on November 13, 2014,`` Santa Monica, Calif.:
RAND Corporation, CT-419, November 2014. On antiquities, see
Financial Action Task Force, Financing of the Terrorist
Organization Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Paris,
February 2015.

There is considerable diversity among Da`ish`s affiliates. Boko
Haram, for example, carried out a series of raids on banks to
secure finances after its establishment. Over time, Boko Haram
has increasingly relied on such measures as extortion. Its
operatives have made telephone calls or sent text messages to
individuals, threatening violence if they fail to pay. Boko Haram
has also received substantial funding from kidnapping.

C. Hezbollah:

Hezbollah receives some assistance from Iran. As Hezbollah leader
Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah remarked several years ago: ``We have
been receiving since 1982 all kinds of moral, political and
material backing from the Islamic Republic of Iran.`` His
statement was the first time he openly admitted that Iran
provided aid. ``In the past we alluded partially to this truth,``
Nasrallah remarked. ``We used to speak of a moral and political
support while keeping silent when questioned about our military
backing so as not to embarrass Iran. But today . . . we have
decided to speak out.``8 In addition, Hezbollah has extensive
fundraising capabilities of its own. Hezbollah`s welfare and
educational programs are run by charitable foundations, which
collect money, often legitimately, from Shi`a Muslim communities
inside and outside Lebanon. The group also benefits from a
diverse series of licit and illicit activities in Lebanon, Iran,
Latin America, West Africa, and elsewhere, including
construction, credit card fraud, illicit drugs, sale of
counterfeit goods, foodstuffs, and clothing manufacture.

III. Policy Implications

U.S. efforts to undermine the finances of terrorist groups must
be done as part of a broader effort to undermine terrorist
ideology, target its key leaders, build the capacity of local
allies, and take other steps. They must also involve coordination
among multiple U.S. agencies and allies such as foreign
governments, international institutions, and non-governmental
organizations overseas. Following are several steps that remain
important.

A. Focus on the Most Significant Threats: Because of the sheer
number of terrorist groups today, the United States should focus
on targeting the finances of those groups that present a
substantial threat to the United States. Terrorist groups can be
divided into several categories: (1) groups that pose a high
threat because they are involved in active plotting against or
encouraging attacks in the U.S. homeland; (2) groups that pose a
medium threat because they are involved in plotting attacks
against U.S. facilities (such as embassies) and U.S. citizens
overseas; and (3) groups those that pose a low threat because
they are focused on targeting local regimes or other countries.
Table 1 provides an overview.

The highest threat likely comes from al Qa`ida in the Arabian
Peninsula, core al Qa`ida (including its Levant cell, sometimes
referred to as the Khorasan Group), Da`ish, and a range of
inspired individuals. With the collapse of the Yemeni government,
al Qa`ida in the Arabian Peninsula retains a capability and
desire to target the U.S. homeland and U.S. interests overseas.
Core al Qa`ida also presents a threat because of its interest in
targeting the U.S. homeland, though its leaders have had
difficulty recruiting or even inspiring competent operatives in
the West. Da`ish is a threat primarily because of its effort to
inspire individuals in the West to conduct attacks. A small
number of inspired individuals, like the Tsarnaev brothers, who
perpetrated the April 2013 Boston Marathon bombings, also pose a
threat. The growth in social media and the terrorist use of chat
rooms, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and other sites and
applications has facilitated radicalization inside the United
States and provided extremists better access to encrypted
communication. The six Americans arrested in April 2014 for
attempting to leave the United States to fight with Da`ish in
Syria, for example, used the instant messaging application Kik to
communicate with each other and with extremists overseas.9

Several groups pose a medium-level threat because of their
interest in and capability to targeting U.S. citizens and
installations overseas. The various Ansar al-Sharia groups in
Libya, for instance, have planned attacks against U.S. diplomats
and infrastructure, including the U.S. embassy. Al Shabaab`s
objectives are largely parochial, and it has conducted attacks in
Somalia and the region, especially Kenya. Finally, some groups
present a low-level threat to the United States. They do not
possess the capability or intent to target the United States at
home or overseas. They include such groups as the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement, which is primarily interested in Chinese
targets.

B. Utilize Targeted Tools: Since these terrorist groups are able
to secure funding from multiple sources, an effective financial
campaign needs to consider a wide range of tools. These tools
need to be modified to deal with different groups and should be
based on intelligence analysis of how groups finance themselves,
including using documents and other material seized from
counterterrorism raids. Examples of key steps include:

--Sanction individuals, groups, and supporters: These sanctions
can involve the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list, other
sanction programs, and broader actions of the U.S. Treasury
Department`s Office of Foreign Assets Control. These sanctions
should also include banks that handle terrorist funds, including
banks used by middlemen or hawalas handling terrorist financing.

--Attack money laundering: Money laundering generally refers to
financial transactions in which criminals, including terrorist
organizations, attempt to disguise the proceeds, sources, or
nature of their illicit activities. The U.S. Department of the
Treasury should continue to utilize a range of assets including a
diverse assortment of legal authorities, core financial
expertise, operational resources, and expansive relationships
with the private sector and international community to identify
and attack money laundering vulnerabilities and networks across
the domestic and international financial systems. This includes
actions under Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act. It also
includes support to the Financial Action Task Force, an
international policymaking and standard-setting body dedicated to
combating money laundering and terrorist financing.

--Undermine terrorist use of charitable organizations: While
charities provide essential services, comfort, and hope to those
in need around the world, terrorists have exploited the
charitable sector to raise and move funds. Groups use some to
provide logistical support, encourage terrorist recruitment, or
otherwise support terrorist organizations and operations.

Target Local Revenue Sources: The terrorist organizations
discussed in this testimony have generated substantial revenue
from local sources. These sources can be targeted. For example,
Da`ish raises most of its money through such practices as oil
smuggling, sales of stolen goods, and extortion. Undermining
these sources of revenue requires providing support for local
ground, air, and maritime operations that disrupt these networks.
Against Da`ish, for instance, effective ground and air strikes by
local forces with U.S. assistance can disrupt Da`ish`s oil
operations, reduce its profits, and buy time to build more-robust
diplomatic, intelligence, and military capabilities for a
coordinated effort to weaken Da`ish financially. One challenge is
to avoid destroying those assets that legitimate successor
governments will need to maintain.

While these steps may not, by themselves, severely degrade
terrorist groups that threaten the United States, they can, in
combination with other steps, undermine the support necessary for
terrorist groups to function.