Body




Statement of Dr. Mark Mahone
Director, Department of Neuropsychology
Kennedy Krieger Institute Baltimore , MD

Committee on Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions

May 10, 2016

The Problem(s)
An Achievement Gap

Approximately 13-14% of students in the U.S. (more than 6 million
children) are identified as having a handicapping condition and
receive special education services in school. Half of those
identified for special education are classified as having a
Specific Learning Disability, and approximately 85% of those
having a primary learning disability have a learning disability
in reading and language processing (i.e., dyslexia). As many as
one third of all students may have symptoms of dyslexia,
including, but not limited to, slow or inaccurate reading, weak
spelling, or poor writing. Not all meet full criteria for a
``disability,`` or will qualify for special education, but most
benefit from systematic, explicit instruction in reading,
writing, and language (also known as structured literacy
instruction).

In my home state of Maryland, the 2015 standardized assessments
revealed that those students enrolled in special education
performed dismally low. On the Partnership for Assessment of
Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC) assessment for grade
level 10, only 7.1% of students in special education met or
exceeded expected performance level (i.e., Level 4 or 5) for
literacy, compared to 39.7% of all students (which is still
unacceptably low). These results are similar to national
statistics for children with disabilities. Recent data from the
National Assessment for Educational Progress (NAEP) for fourth
grade achievement show a significant, long-standing difference
between all students and those with disabilities. From 1998 to
2013, 8.6% of students with disabilities scored proficient in
reading versus 26% of nondisabled peers (also unacceptably low).

The achievement gap for students with disabilities is especially
prominent in schools with limited resources such as those in the
Baltimore City Public School (BCPS) system, where the majority of
the students come from low-income families and the need for
services far surpasses available resources (BNIA, 2012).

Moreover, according to the 2014 Department of Education Report to
Congress on the Implementation of the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), only 10-15% of students with
individualized education programs (IEPs) exit the special
education system by returning to regular education.

Why Students Fail

Why is it that so many students (with otherwise adequate
intelligence) struggle or fail academically in today`s schools?
In particular, why are so many children failing when it comes to
learning to read? Is the prevalence of dyslexia so high it can
explain such high rates of school failure? I assert that the
answer is no.

There are a variety of (often inter-related) reasons, for
academic failure, including: 1) poverty/disadvantage, 2) poor
instruction, 3) childhood trauma (including neglect and abuse),
4) psychopathology, 5) chronic psychosocial stress, 6) illness or
injury, and,the focus of my testimony, 7) highly prevalent
neurodevelopmental disorders (i.e., dyslexia and
Attentiondeficit/ Hyperactivity Disorder-ADHD). The wait-to-fail
model typically associated with current educational practices,
where students first have to underperform in order to receive the
necessary educational interventions, suggests students with
disabilities may be at risk from early on in their educational
lives.

Opportunity-to-Learn

One potential explanation for this persistent achievement gap is
the differential in the opportunity-to-learn (OTL), or the
quantity and quality of instruction for students with
disabilities compared to their non-disabled peers. Reduced OTL
exists for students with disabilities despite increased access to
the general education setting and curriculum (Eckes & Swando,
2009). Moreover, there is a demonstrated OTL differential for
students with disabilities and their non-disabled peers, even
within the same classroom (Kurz et al., 2014).

Prevalence of Dyslexia

Dyslexia is highly prevalent. It is not just the most common
learning disability, but the most common developmental disorder-
twice as prevalent as ADHD, and 10-15 times as prevalent as
autism. The International Dyslexia Association (IDA) reports that
dyslexia affects an estimated 8.5 million school children and one
in six individuals nationwide.

Societal Risks Associated with Academic Failure

Up to 76% of students with learning disabilities will be
suspended at least once (Fabelo et al., 2011). The presence of a
learning disability also confers a greater risk for school
dropout (Cramer et al., 2014), especially among low-income
students, and a well-documented connection exists between school
dropout and incarceration (National Center on Secondary Education
and Transition, 2012). According to the National Disability
Rights Network (2012), it is estimated that as many as 50% of
inmates have some type of disability.

In the juvenile justice system, this number is estimated to be up
to 75%. Moreover, approximately 75% of youth under age 18 who
have been sentenced to adult prisons have not completed 10th
grade. Within the juvenile justice population, 70% suffer from
learning disabilities and 33% are reading below the 4th grade
level (Coalition for Juvenile Justice, 2001). Given these
observations, appropriate (and thorough) early identification and
provision of evidence-based intervention for children with
learning disabilities, especially dyslexia, represents a public
health priority.

Problems with Current Educational Practices

While there are undoubtedly a variety of reasons behind the
persistent achievement gap among children with disabilities (and
dyslexia specifically), I assert that there are three critical
problems with current educational practices that contribute most
prominently to the chronically (and unacceptably) low performance
and underlie this public health crisis.

First, pre-service teacher preparation programs fail to routinely
train educators to fully understand how learning occurs in
children (and conversely, what processes get in the way of
learning) using current knowledge from the developmental,
behavioral, and neuroscience literature. As a result, the
strategies and techniques being implemented by teachers of
children with disabilities are often not based on available
scientific evidence (i.e., a ``translation gap``).

Second, despite (often intensive) intervention, students with
dyslexia often continue to have significant associated problems
(e.g., behavioral, motivational, psychiatric) that interfere with
learning and with routine educational interventions. Addressing
only the reading problem instead of all of the needs of the child
leads to incomplete and ineffective care.

Third, individuals in local educational leadership positions
(i.e., those who make decisions regarding policy, training, and
curricula) often do not have the training and knowledge to
appropriately advocate for policy changes that ultimately benefit
the behavior and learning of students with dyslexia.

Issues Complicating the Care of Individuals with Dyslexia

The Trouble with Terminology

Despite best efforts by the scientific community, heterogeneity
in terminology and definitions remains an impediment to achieving
consensus in identification, treatment, and epidemiology. For the
purposes of my testimony, I consider dyslexia to be equivalent to
(or interchangeable with) a developmental learning disorder (or
specific learning disability) in reading (i.e., reading
disability or disorder). In other words, dyslexia is one type of
(specific) learning disability.

The Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of
2004 uses the term Specific Learning Disability, defined as: ``A
disorder in one or more of the basic psychological processes
involved in understanding or in using language, spoken or
written, that may manifest itself in an imperfect ability to
listen, think, speak, read, write, spell, or do mathematical
calculations. The term includes such conditions as perceptual
handicaps, brain injury, minimal brain dysfunction, dyslexia, and
developmental aphasia, while it excludes children who have
learning problems that are primarily the result of visual,
hearing, or motor handicaps; of mental retardation (now known as
intellectual disability); of emotional disturbance; or of
environmental, cultural, or economic disadvantage.``

The 2013 guidelines outlined in the American Psychological
Association`s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5) use a slightly different term: Specific
Learning Disorder. According to the DSM-5, diagnosis is made
using a synthesis of the individual`s history (development,
medical, family, education), psychoeducational reports of test
scores and observations, and response to intervention. Thus, the
DSM-5 criteria reflect a hybrid model of identification.
Importantly, the guidelines also reflect recognition that
individuals may ``grow into`` their learning deficits; thus,
functional problems may not be fully manifest until a later age.

The definition of dyslexia used by the International Dyslexia
Association-IDA (and also adopted by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development-NICHD),
is as follows: ``Dyslexia is a specific learning disability that
is neurobiological in origin. It is characterized by difficulties
with accurate and/or fluent word recognition and by poor spelling
and decoding abilities. These difficulties typically result from
a deficit in the phonological component of language that is often
unexpected in relation to other cognitive abilities and the
provision of effective classroom instruction. Secondary
consequences may include problems in reading comprehension and
reduced reading experience that can impede growth of vocabulary
and background knowledge.``

The DSM-5 provides more specific guidelines in its criteria than
the IDA. DSM-5 criteria for a Specific Learning Disorder in
reading includes difficulties with learning and using academic
skills, as indicated by the presence of at least one of the
following symptoms that have persisted for at least 6 months,
despite the provision of interventions that target those
difficulties:

1) inaccurate or slow and effortful word reading (e.g., reads
single words aloud incorrectly or slowly and hesitantly,
frequently guesses words, has difficulty sounding out words); or,
2) difficulty understanding the meaning of what is read (e.g.,
may read text accurately but not understand the sequence,
relationships, inferences, or deeper meanings of what is read).

Dyslexia is Defined by Low Achievement in Reading-But How Low?

Implied (or stated specifically) in the aforementioned
definitions is the notion that dyslexia is a neurobiologically
based developmental disorder that affects the brain`s ability to
receive, process, store, and respond to information. Although not
specifically stated, dyslexia is considered to occur along a
continuum, with variability in severity and characteristic
features, rather than as a discrete, dichotomous entity. Put
simply, in most cases, dyslexia refers to instances in which an
individual`s reading achievement unexpectedly falls at the low
end of the normal distribution of all readers. Except in cases of
very low overall intellectual level, this ``low achievement``
model of dyslexia is not tied to the child`s overall IQ, and does
not require a ``significant discrepancy`` between the
individual`s IQ and reading achievement. Conversely, the model
also does not imply that individuals with dyslexia have
exceptionally high IQ, or compensatory ``strengths`` in other
cognitive or academic skill areas.

Unfortunately, while the low achievement model of dyslexia is
fairly well accepted in the scientific community, there is less
consensus as to the threshold for defining low reading
achievement as dyslexia, with distributional ``cutoff`` scores
ranging from as low as the 5th percentile to the 25th percentile.
Not surprisingly, the scientific literature yields different
findings with regard to the cognitive and behavioral phenotypes,
neurobiological correlates (e.g., neuroimaging,
electrophysiology), and genetics of dyslexia depending on how it
is defined.

Additionally, given that the federal definition of a Specific
Learning Disability in reading used in determining eligibility
for special education services leaves considerable room for local
interpretation (e.g., relative to the criteria for Intellectual
Disability), school districts across the U.S. demonstrate
considerable inconsistency in diagnostic practices. Although
clearly not the intent of the federal law, in practice, it is not
uncommon for a child receiving special education services for
dyslexia in one school district to move to another district and
be declared suddenly ``ineligible`` based on the new district`s
interpretation of the criteria.

Developmental Course of Dyslexia

Dyslexia is acknowledged as a developmental disability. That
means those with ``symptoms`` of reading problems do not
necessarily have a disability. Specifically, a disability is
considered to occur when one`s personal limitations (often
biological in nature) produce a significant disadvantage when
attempting to function in one`s society. Thus, a learning
disability is necessarily considered within the context of the
environment, personal factors, and individualized supports. It
implies that there is a ``mismatch`` or discrepancy between one`s
own biology and demands of the environment (considering all
available supports). As a developmental disability, it is
acknowledged that this discrepancy (and the functional impact)
associated with dyslexia can change over time.

For most individuals with dyslexia, the functional deficits first
have an impact in childhood, usually in the preschool or early
elementary school years. For some, however, the manifestations
and impact may not become evident until later in childhood, in
the teenage years, or even in the adult years, even though the
neurobiological basis of the condition is present earlier-a
concept referred to as the ``time referenced symptom`` (Rudel,
1981). Nevertheless, in most individuals with dyslexia, the
disorder manifests in a persistent functional deficit, rather
than a developmental lag. The functional disability often
persists over time, despite intervention efforts, and typically
does not spontaneously remit with time or age. Among individuals
with early-onset learning disabilities who have received
consistent, high-quality intervention by early elementary school,
deficits in word reading accuracy can improve; however, deficits
in phonological processing, automaticity of word recognition,
expressive language, and reading fluency tend to persist.

It`s Not Just Decoding: Reading Fluency and Processing Speed

Reading fluency, or the ability to read words quickly either in
isolation or text, is especially critical for older children who
are required to learn from what they are reading. The lack of
fluency increases demands on other processes, such as working
memory, and results in difficulty with comprehension because
higher-level processes have to compete with word decoding for the
same time-limited resources, creating a bottleneck. Therefore,
especially for older children, it is critical that they are not
only accurate at word reading, but also efficient, automatic, and
fluent readers. It is well established that rapid automatized
naming deficits (reflective of poor automaticity) are present in
individuals with dyslexia; however, automaticity deficits are
also observed in children referred for learning problems, whether
or not they have dyslexia specifically (Waber et al., 2000).

Dyslexia and ADHD represent the two most common childhood
neurodevelopmental disorders. Approximately 35-40% of children
with dyslexia have ADHD; while 35-40% of children with ADHD have
dyslexia. As such, the two disorders co-occur more often than
expected by chance (Couto et al., 2009). The most parsimonious
explanation for the cooccurrence is that they partially share
genetic risk factors (Greven et al., 2011).

To this end, scientists have identified a ``multiple-deficit``
model to explain the comorbidity between ADHD and dyslexia in
which each disorder manifests multiple deficits- some specific
and some shared (Pennington et al., 2010). The ADHD model
includes one unique predictor (response inhibition) and one
shared predictor (processing speed), while the dyslexia model
includes two unique predictors (phonological awareness, naming
speed), and one shared predictor (processing speed). Here,
processing speed represents the speed with which a task is
completed with reasonable accuracy.

Children with ADHD (nearly 10% of students ages 4-17 years;
Pastor et al., 2015) commonly display slow processing speed
(Jacobson et al., 2011); however, slow processing speed is also
observed in children with dyslexia (Willcutt et al., 2005).
Becoming a skilled reader involves adequate reading fluency,
which is linked to efficient processing speed. Thus, while
processing speed is separable from the core phonological deficit
in dyslexia, it can influence reading fluency, even among
individuals who can read single words accurately (i.e., those
without ``classic`` phonological dyslexia), and can affect the
development of more complex academic skills such as reading
comprehension (Sesma et al., 2009).

To this end, processing speed (a core skill underlying reading
fluency) may represent a promising candidate for a behavioral
``polyphenotype`` (i.e., a phenotype constituting core deficits
of more than one disorder), whose psychological makeup can
account for comorbidity between common neurodevelopmental
conditions and whose genetic architecture can account for the
phenotypic correlations between these highly prevalent disorders
(Gregorinko, 2012).

Late Emerging Reading Disabilities and Reading Comprehension

Approximately 41% of all students with dyslexia have late-
emerging reading disabilities; that is, deficits are not evident
until at least third grade. This pattern, sometimes known as the
``fourth-grade slump,`` can be associated with the transition
from ``learning to read`` to ``reading to learn,`` and may also
be related to reduced vocabulary development in students of low
socioeconomic status backgrounds. From this point forward,
curricula emphasize fluency and comprehension rather than more
basic word recognition skills. Beyond third grade, students are
also expected to be able to incorporate cause/effect sequences,
goals/plans for characters, and conclusions that relate to final
events to those at the beginning of the story (all higher-order
cognitive skills). Children who received early intervention and
showed improvement may start to struggle again with the increased
demands and volume of middle and high school reading and when
they are expected to work more independently.

Late-emerging reading disabilities are often associated with
coexisting conditions, especially ADHD, the second most common
developmental disability. It is clear that children who have
early problems involving basic word recognition will most likely
also have difficulty with reading comprehension; however, more
recently, researchers have identified groups of children without
reading basic word reading deficits who go on to have
difficulties in reading comprehension, perhaps as a result of
their associated executive function deficits (Sesma et al.,
2009).

These children are considered to have ``specific`` reading
comprehension disorders (Cutting et al., 2009; Locascio et al.,
2010), and many also have associated ADHD. Working memory
deficits (i.e., problems ``holding`` and manipulating information
mentally) associated with ADHD can prevent students from
monitoring what they read, as they are more susceptible to being
distracted by detail when reading longer text-failing to
``remember`` main ideas. These findings challenge the long held
``simple view`` of reading (Hoover & Gough, 1990), which argued
that reading comprehension was primarily the product of word
reading and listening comprehension, and acknowledge the
important contribution of higher-order ``executive function``
skills to the development of competent reading.

Early Detection of Dyslexia-Proceed with Caution

The 2016 Research Excellence and Advancements for Dyslexia Act
(READ Act) (H.R. 3033) supports important research to further our
understanding of dyslexia, including emphasis on better methods
for early detection and teacher training. The Act specifies early
identification of children and students with dyslexia,
professional development about dyslexia for teachers and
administrators, curricula development and evidence-based
educational tools for children with dyslexia. As an educator,
clinician and scientist, I applaud these efforts.

Nevertheless, when considering early detection of dyslexia (i.e.,
a developmental disability, as defined above), it is critical to
distinguish between ``unexpected`` and ``unwarranted`` failures
in reading achievement. In other words, when considering early
detection, one must determine whether a problem represents true
dyslexia or a brain that is not (yet) ready to read. To be clear,
with informed assessment, risk for dyslexia can be identified
early (often in the preschool years); however, we need to be very
careful that we are not simply identifying children who are not
yet biologically ready to read, but who have been pushed (too
early) into academic demands. The scientific literature suggests
that early (and accurate) identification of dyslexia and
appropriate teaching of reading can prevent the experience of
failure in children who are at risk. With appropriate
interventions, the life history of students with dyslexia can be
substantially ``normalized`` and secondary mental health issues
averted.

In the last 20 years, however, even before NCLB, ESSA, Common
Core Standards, or PARCC, there has been an alarming trend
towards increasing early academic demands, such that Kindergarten
is the ``new first grade.`` These practices ignore the child (and
brain) development scientific literature as it relates to
developmental readiness for academic demands. There are risks
associated with developmentally premature educational
expectations for the children who experience failure, and the
emotional/motivational consequences of encountering premature
reading and writing expectations may be long lasting.

Moreover, the over-burdening of the already under-supported
special education services with the ``unready`` now becoming
indistinguishable from the truly dyslexic is yet another serious
consequence. At the level of brain development, children forced
prematurely to perform academic tasks may do so and appear to
make progress, however, at the expense of using suboptimal
circuitous pathways in the brain that ultimately may fail to
support efficient and comfortable skill utilization in later
years. This risk is exacerbated in young boys, whose physical
maturation and brain development are at least a year behind that
of same-age girls by Kindergarten entry (Eme, 1992; Lenroot et
al., 2007).

Thus, the (very appropriate) mission of early detection of
dyslexia presents us with a conflict that requires awareness of
the developmental appropriateness of reading instruction and
reading expectations for a significant proportion of students in
Kindergarten (or younger).

``Pure`` Dyslexia is the Exception, Not the Rule

Most definitions of dyslexia specify that the observed
difficulties in reading are not due to other physical, cognitive,
or emotional exclusionary factors. The assessments of these
exclusionary factors are often complicated, because dyslexia
commonly co-occurs with ADHD, language and other communication
disorders, developmental motor coordination disorder, and other
psychiatric disorders, including anxiety disorders and
depression.

A sizeable proportion of students with dyslexia have associated
social-emotional problems, with estimates ranging from 38% to 75%
(Bryan et. al., 2004). A recent meta-analysis revealed that
approximately 70% of students with learning disabilities
experience higher levels of anxious symptomatology than their
peers without learning disabilities (Nelson & Harwood, 2011),
raising the concern that many (if not most) students with
dyslexia are at high risk for anxiety disorders that cause
additional distress, reduce motivation, and complicate
interventions (given the negative impact of anxiety on cognitive
performance of all kinds). Students with learning disabilities
are also at greater risk for developing depression, as they tend
to struggle with self-esteem and are less socially accepted than
students without learning disabilities (Maag & Reid, 2006), and
some studies have shown a link between learning disabilities and
increased rates of suicide (Bender et al., 1999).

Given these associations, ``pure`` dyslexia is more the exception
than the rule, and attention to the associated conditions and
risks is of paramount importance.

What Needs to be Done

The prevalence, morbidity, and societal costs associated with
dyslexia represent a major public health concern. In light of the
problems cited above, I offer the following recommendations to
support individuals with dyslexia and their families.

1. Support Translational Educational Practices. The wealth of
scientific knowledge is often not accessible to front line
teachers. Pre-service (undergraduate and graduate) and
professional development training programs for teachers provide
inadequate training in evidence-based practices for
identification of dyslexia and intervention. If teachers are
trained in evidence-based practices, they will use them. If they
enter the field without this training, they will need access to
professional development programs, along with supervision and
mentoring, in order to use these programs with accuracy and
fidelity.

2. Strive for Consistency in Diagnostic Practices. It is critical
for the scientific and educational communities to work toward a
common language and a common set of procedures for identifying
dyslexia, with efforts aimed toward more specific terminology.

3. Increase opportunity-to-learn (OTL) for students with
dyslexia. OTL is dependent on three interrelated classroom
practices: 1) the amount of instructional time committed to the
curriculum; 2) the use of evidence-based practices for teaching
students with dyslexia; and, 3) classroom emphasis on best
practices for supporting and developing high-order cognitive
skills, such as problem solving, planning, and organizing
thoughts and information (which are especially important,
considering the comorbid conditions associated with dyslexia).
Given the increased emphasis within classroom assignments and in
standardized testing (such as PARCC) on integration of
information, self-monitoring, and problem solving, competence in
higher-order cognitive skills (executive functions) is critical
to student success and to narrowing the achievement gap.

4. Recognize the many forms of dyslexia. Dyslexia should be
considered to include not only difficulties in phonology,
decoding, automaticity and word recognition, but also the (often
later emerging) problems in reading fluency and comprehension.

5. Support training of general educators. Recognize that most
children with dyslexia are taught primarily by general education
teachers. It is critical to support inclusive practices in which
special educators and reading specialists collaborate with
general educators.

6. Treat the whole child-not just reading. Support efforts that
allow acknowledge that students with dyslexia are at risk for
psychosocial, language, motivational, academic, neuromotor, and
psychiatric comorbidities. By treating only reading problem, we
reduce the chances for positive outcomes.

7. Support use of developmentally appropriate methods for early
identification. It is critical that those involved in early
identification of dyslexia understand the potential for
misidentification of children who are prematurely placed into
academically accelerated programs before their brains are
developmentally ready.
