Body




Statement of Hal Salzman, Ph.D.
Professor, E.J. Bloustein School of Planning & Public Policy
J.J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development
Rutgers University

Committee on the Senate Judiciary

March 17, 2015

Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank you for inviting
me to speak on the topic of ``Immigration Reforms Needed to
Protect Skilled American Workers,`` and in particular on high-
skill labor demand and supply, and the size and impact of the
high skill guestworker labor force. My analysis draws on several
decades of workforce research on technology industries,
globalization, and several recent, in-depth studies of STEM labor
supply and, currently, on STEM educational pathways and
attainment. This research was conducted with my colleagues
Leonard Lynn at Case Western Reserve University, Lindsay Lowell
at Georgetown University, and Daniel Kuehn, American University,
and is funded by the Sloan Foundation and the National Science
Foundation.1

Assessing approaches to immigration reform for high skill workers
involves, at the core of the issue, understanding whether the
nation benefits from technology firms using their current levels
of high-skill guestworkers and the likely impact of various
legislative changes proposed. Let me start with a point on which
nearly all are in agreement: guestworker flows should be
something greater than zero, and something less than 145 million
(the size of the U.S. workforce).

Thus, the issue is not about whether or not to have guestworkers;
it is about determining the right number and the policies
governing their work conditions. In terms of high-skill
guestworkers, primarily on H-1B and L visas, determining the
right number, or evaluating whether increases or decreases in the
number are best for the economy, and impact on the American
worker, we want to know: Is there a shortage that impedes
business productivity and growth and national prosperity?
Answering this question depends fundamentally on examining the
evidence about three issues:

The adequacy of supply of U.S. STEM graduates and workers;

The size of current and proposed guestworkers flows;

Impact on U.S. workforce, on innovation capacity, on the nation.

When considering the issues of whether there are enough U.S.
students and workers to fill STEM jobs, whether industry has a
real labor shortage or is just dissatisfied with the time and
effort it takes to find the workers it wants, or is dissatisfied
with the wages it needs to pay to get the workers it wants, let
me say that there is no single study that conclusively answers
those questions; our measures are often imprecise or at an
aggregate level that may not address the situation in each and
every firm or industry. What we want to consider, thus, is what
is indicated by the preponderance of evidence, and what are the
most direct and relevant measures of the demand for, and impact
of, STEM guestworkers.

My colleagues and I have examined the key questions using
multiple methods, data, and indicators from field work and
interviews at firms to analysis of large, national datasets. The
preponderance of evidence is fairly clear that:

(1) The U.S. supply of top performing graduates is large and far
exceeds the hiring needs of the STEM industries, with only half
of new STEM graduates finding jobs in a STEM occupation (and only
a third of all STEM graduates in the workforce hold a STEM job);

All market indicators, such as wages and employment rates,
suggest that, with few exceptions, an ample supply of labor is
available given current and projected demand (demand for computer
science graduates, as stated by the IT industry, can be met by
just half to two-thirds of the current annual supply of U.S.
graduates);

Guestworker supply is large and highly concentrated in the IT
industry; it is likely a factor in the flat wage levels in the IT
industry and, perhaps, for a substitution of young, entry-level
guestworkers for experienced, incumbent, U.S. workers; and, most
importantly,

The predominant function of IT guestworker visa programs is to
facilitate the offshoring of IT work that is, the ability of
firms to move IT work from the U.S. to offshore locations is
highly dependent on their supply of H-1B and L visas for their
companies. These are companies such as IBM, Accenture, Deloitte,
Ernst & Young as well as the internationally-based firms such as
Infosys, Wipro, and TCS.

The second, and growing, use of guestworkers is by product firms
and U.S.-based service firms to staff their workforces for
largely domestic-based projects. The largest H1B visa sponsors
among these would include Microsoft, Google, Intel, Oracle,
Apple, and Amazon (Top 100 H1B Visa Sponsors, 2013). There are
then a number of smaller firms that provide, in aggregate,
significant staffing services both temporary and permanent. These
firms supply guestworkers to a range of other firms and are more
often identified as those offering substantially lower wages and
engaging in substandard labor practices.

These findings suggest that:

The large use of guestworkers by firms in each of these segments
combine, in aggregate, to distort the STEM labor market, with the
number of guestworkers equal to two-thirds of current entry-level
and early-career hiring; it is high-skill guestworker policies,
rather than market competition, that currently determine working
conditions and job opportunities for U.S. STEM workers, with
diminished opportunities for students and workers who wish to
pursue a career in the IT industry. 2

Current guestworker visa policies for students and new graduates
appear to provide incentives to colleges and universities to
establish Masters programs that, as their business model, almost
exclusively recruit foreign students into lower quality programs
that provide easy entry into the U.S. labor market, further
expanding the supply of entry-level STEM workers.

Proposed high-skill guestworker legislation would expand the
supply of guestworkers to levels greater than the total number of
new technology jobs; that is, these visa changes would provide
enough guestworkers to fill every new job opening in the IT
workforce with a reserve large enough to allow firms to legally
substitute young guestworkers for their incumbent workforce, both
directly and through expanded offshoring. (8) ``Green Cards for
Grads`` provisions in I-Squared and other bills would further
distort the U.S. higher education system, providing incentives
for colleges and universities to establish, or expand current
Masters programs as ``global services`` that offer a green card
for the price of a graduate degree, and that are offered
primarily or even exclusively for foreign students and directly
or indirectly exclude U.S. students.

In sum, current policies and the proposed changes in high skill
guestworker visas and immigration policies that increase the
supply of high skill guestworkers are likely to exacerbate the
already deteriorating labor force conditions and career prospects
for STEM graduates and workers. Notably, it is only the IT
industries that claim worker shortages whereas nearly all other
STEM fields have acknowledged the need to address problems of
oversupply and, in many science fields, poor career prospects for
STEM graduates.

1. The supply of STEM graduates

The U.S. STEM workforce numbers about 7.5 to 8 million, or about
5 percent of the workforce. The computer occupations comprise
about half (48.5%) of the STEM workforce at 3.7 to 4 million
workers. If we use the BLS projections for IT job growth, which
is comprised of replacements (for those leaving the workforce
because of retirements and job separations layoffs and quits) and
growth of the workforce, the IT industry needs approximately
124,000 new workers each year. Mircosoft`s Washington
representative and counsel Brad Smith (in his Congressional
testimony) uses an earlier BLS projection of an annual increase
of 120,000, and the trade organization code.org, echoed by the
Computing Research Association, use 150,000 as the expected
annual demand for new IT workers (Harsha, 2014). Smith and these
associations then assert that the BLS workforce growth estimates
represent the demand for computer science graduates. Matched
against annual computer science graduation of 67,000 in 2012, the
claim of a supply shortage is made. It is these statistics and
claims that are repeated widely.

However, such claims misinterpret the BLS workforce projections
for the computer occupations in asserting it is a demand for
computer science graduates. For example, Daniel Costa conducted a
detailed study of these computer science shortage claims by
Microsoft and other companies and shows the evidence does not
support these claims because, among other reasons, ``[i]t is a
well-known fact that computer science graduates are not the only
source of new hires in computing....less than one-fourth to less
than one-half of workers in computing occupations have a computer
science degree`` (Costa, 2012). In fact, of those currently in
computer occupations, only 14 percent hold a computer science
degree and another 4 percent have electrical engineering (EE)
degrees. Since that reflects the education level of the entire
current IT workforce, of all ages, it could understate the
current cohort education levels.

Examining recent cohorts of all new entrants into IT occupations
who have a post-secondary education, we find 34 percent have a
bachelors or master computer science degree (See Figure 1); of
just the pool of four-year college graduates entering computer
occupations, 46 percent have a computer science degree. About 36
percent of entrants into computer occupations do not have any
four year degree. Thus, we estimate that demand for new workers
in computer occupations with a computer science degree as
approximately 29 percent of the BLS projection of total demand
for new workers (65% of new workforce entrants in computer
occupations have a four-year degree and 46% of those have a
degree in computer science, or 29% of all new workforce
entrants). Using the actual educational composition of the
computer occupations as an estimate of hiring demand by education
and degree, the supply of computer science graduates needed to
meet industry demand would be approximately 36,500 computer
science graduates each year (based on the BLS projection of
124,000 new jobs). Figure 2 shows the historical graduation
numbers of computer science graduates.

Current graduation rates indicate that projected employment
demand specifically for computer science (CS) graduates can be
met by about half of the current supply of 70,000 Bachelors CS
graduates each year, and the balance of demand can be met by
those graduating with a range of other degrees, as is the
historical pattern. Even if current industry hiring is for a much
greater level of computer scientists than historical hiring
patterns, the current pool of graduates would provide sufficient
numbers of computer scientists to meet industry demand. Our
analysis of a large, nationally representative survey of a recent
college cohort by the National Center for Educational Statistics
finds that only two-thirds of computer science graduates went
into IT jobs in 2009 (that would include all IT jobs, not just
those for formally defined as computer occupations). Of those not
landing an IT job, half said they found a better job elsewhere.
Fully one third reported there were no IT jobs available
(although this was the year after the start of the Great
Recession, this is only slightly lower than the historical trend;
Salzman, et al., 2013). Also worth noting is that an additional
64,341 students earned an Associates degree, certification or
licensure in IT in 2012, also far exceeding the expected growth
of 44,600 new IT workers with less than a Bachelors degree for
work in the computer occupations (many of whom do not require an
Associates degree, certification or licensure).

STEM beyond IT

The demand for guestworkers and the various claims of
``shortages`` often discuss the labor market demand as a more
general STEM workforce/industry problem. As noted above,
guestworkers are predominantly employed in the IT industry, and
are predominantly used to support offshore software development,
with a second significant use to provide lower cost labor for
positions in the U.S., either directly for software product firms
or for their subcontractors and personnel staffing firms. If
there really were a shortage of technical and scientific talent
in the U.S., we should observe it in other STEM industries, not
just in IT. In fact, most of the other STEM occupations and
industries -science, engineering, and math should have workforce
that are more difficult to develop given the more demanding
requirements and longer time period required for education and
training. Of all the STEM fields, ``T``, which is almost
exclusively computer science at the four-year college degree
level, and math (also an IT ``feeder`` major) are the least
demanding fields of all the STEM disciplines in terms of STEM
credit hours. In Figure 3, which plots the distribution of credit
hours by major (of those graduating at four-year colleges), the
computer science and math majors take far fewer STEM credits than
either science or engineering graduates. It should, thus, be
easier to expand the number of computer science and math majors
than science and engineering majors given current resources.

Kernel density estimate

Life&Phys Science Math CS/IT Engineering

Yet, science and engineering firms are not claiming they need
guestworkers to address a shortage. In fact, studies of science
careers finds there is a glut of Ph.D. life scientists resulting
in poor employment prospects for new graduates and post-doctoral
scientists (e.g., Teitelbaum 2008; Stephan, 2012; Freeman, 2004;
NIH, 2012). The National Institutes of Health has developed a
program to help new biomedical Ph.D.s find alternative careers in
the face of ``unattractive`` job prospects in the field (NIH,
2012). The NIH Director`s ``Broadening Experience in Scientific
Training`` (BEST) program was launched three years ago in
response to findings by many researchers and the NIH Advisory
Committee to the Director (ACD) Biomedical Workforce Task Force
which found few career opportunities for biomedical scientists in
traditional science fields; this program is intended to address
the oversupply of biomedical scientists by developing alternative
career paths they can pursue. Overall, in the science fields,
there are twice as many university graduates at the Bachelors
level than the number who enter into a science occupation every
year. Similarly, engineering schools graduate 50 percent more
graduates than find jobs in engineering each year (see Figure 4);
the one engineering area where there has been a shortage,
petroleum engineering, is the exception that proves the rule (see
discussion of petroleum engineers, below).

If we examine the entire workforce, of all incumbent workers
currently employed, a recent study by the U.S. Census Bureau
finds that of those who have a STEM degree, only 36% are employed
in a STEM field (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012). This is consistent
with the National Science Foundation`s analyses of field of
degree and occupation. Figure 5 shows the NSF analysis of degree
holders and occupation, showing less than a third of science and
engineering degree holders are in a science or engineering
occupation. Although some portion of the STEM degree holders who
are not in a formal STEM job are no doubt working in jobs
utilizing their STEM education, the evidence suggests there is
still a very large supply of STEM educated workers available to
STEM industries if there were demand for them. The evidence does
not reflect a deficit in the number of STEM graduates in the
workforce or in our current annual production rates of STEM
graduates.

Rather than ``shortages,`` the concern about the STEM workforce
overall is about the worsening career prospects and indications
that supply far in excess of demand weakens the labor market in
these fields, motivating students to pursue careers elsewhere.
This was the finding in our analysis of changes in the
composition of STEM graduates going into STEM jobs over the past
three decades. We found that although the overall supply remained
strong, fewer of the highest performing students were going into
STEM jobs (Lowell, et al., 2009). Other STEM workforce
researchers find similar outcomes and evidence supporting similar
conclusions. Even the lead author of a widely-cited study that
asserted the need for more STEM graduates, Tony Carnevale of
Georgetown University`s Center on Education and the Workforce,
said, ``If you`re a high performing math student in America, from
a purely economic point of view, it`s crazy to go into STEM``
(Light and Silverman, 2011). And, in fact, many of the top
students flock to Wall Street and corporate law firms and other
non-STEM jobs.

It is thus curious that claims about ``STEM shortages`` only
assert a need to fill IT jobs for which, paradoxically, the vast
majority are not filled by STEM graduates. Nor do most IT jobs
require the education or training of a STEM degree (which, in any
case, is the least demanding of all STEM fields in terms of STEM
credit hours.) Moreover, these shortage claims rest almost
entirely on employer reports about the difficulties they face in
hiring.

Fieldwork research, including ours (Lynn and Salzman, 2010;
Salzman, 2000) finds that reports of hiring difficulties often
reflect unrealistic expectations. Traditionally, during tight
labor markets, such as before the dot.com crash, employers will
hire good candidates who may not be ``perfect,`` but the firms
will invest in training them. However, recent studies of employer
recruiting find a decrease in recruitment intensity and little
evidence of efforts to address unmet hiring needs. Peter Cappelli
(2012) of the Wharton School concludes that employers have become
willing to wait, hoping for the perfect candidate, the ``purple
squirrel,`` believing that unemployment is high and there must be
someone who will not require training. Because it is a slow
economy, there is less urgency to fill positions quickly and a
longer search time is possible.

Do Markets Work? The case of Petroleum Engineering3

Petroleum engineering offers an important case of observed labor
market shortages and the market response of firms and students.
It is instructive to consider in light of current claims about
market failure in the IT sector and industry`s assertion that
they are unable to obtain the needed supply of graduates from
U.S. colleges and universities. This case is of further interest
because, as noted above, engineering is the most demanding
college major in terms of credit hours, technical content, and
time to completion whereas computer science and math degrees have
the lowest course hour distribution of the STEM fields,
suggesting increases in engineering supply should be more
difficult to achieve than in other fields.

In the 1970s, the building of the Trans-Alaskan Pipeline and
increased oil exploration in other regions led to rapidly
increasing demand for petroleum engineers. By 2002, however,
Occupational Outlook forecast an employment decline ``because
most of the petroleum-producing areas in the United States
already have been explored`` (BLS, 2004), and this continued to
be the forecast through the 2008 edition of Occupational Outlook.
In the most recent edition, 2014-2015, however, the BLS forecast
changed to a projected employment increase of 26 percent over the
coming decade because ``petroleum engineers increasingly will be
needed to develop new resources, as well as new methods of
extracting more from existing sources.`` The shift to greater
exploration followed the 2008 oil price spike, which also
increased the returns to investments in types of oil extraction
that were previously cost-prohibitive (e.g., tar sands), thus
increasing the demand for petroleum engineers, especially those
with new skill sets.

The number of job openings began to exceed the number of
graduates around 2002, even though there still had been no
overall workforce growth. This was because of retirements and
little hiring since the earlier oil boom and hiring expansion of
the 1970s and 1980s. In some interviews with managers in oil
companies in the mid-2000s, we found high levels of concern
because the large cohort of engineers hired in the 1970s and
1980s was retiring just as the firms were launching large
development and maintenance projects. This underlying demand was
then exacerbated by the oil price spike, which intensified
exploration efforts as higher oil prices made previously
unprofitable exploration profitable. The response to this
confluence of events - little hiring for many years, a current
workforce that was aging and retiring and sudden increase in oil
exploration led to a classic textbook example of market
disequilibrium. The earlier shortage had already led to increases
in starting salaries, but with the oil price spike petroleum
engineering starting salaries rose even further, becoming the
highest of all fields of engineering for new bachelor`s degree
graduates (National Association of Colleges and Employers, 2010).
Starting salaries jumped from an already high $43,674 in 1997 to
$50,400 in 1999. Starting salaries rose further to $55,987 in
2003, $61,516 in 2005 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2004, 2006),
and $86,220 in 2010 (National Association of Colleges and
Employers, 2010).

In all these years, petroleum engineering salaries were higher
than other engineering salaries but, until before the spike in
demand, the petroleum engineering starting salary premium was
relatively small. For example, the 1997 $43,674 starting salary
for petroleum engineers was only slightly greater than that for
the second highest paid engineering field, chemical engineers,
who received an average starting salary of $42,817. In 2010,
however, the starting salary of $86,220 for petroleum engineers
was much higher than that of the second highest field, still
chemical engineering, which was only $65,142 (National
Association of Colleges and Employers, 2010).

In response to this and other market signals the number of new
petroleum engineering degrees awarded by U.S. universities more
than tripled (American Oil & Gas Reporter, 2010). In just the
period from 2007-2008 to 2010-2011, U.S. university petroleum
engineering departments increased the number of Ph.D. graduates
from 39 to 95. Texas A&M and Colorado School of Mines more than
tripled their output of new graduates from 42 to 128 and 32 to
100, respectively. Reports from some petroleum engineering
programs indicate an even greater increase in demand in
subsequent years (TTU, 2010). The dramatic increase in petroleum
engineering followed the steep rise in starting salaries, which
in turn reflected an observable increase in industry demand. This
would seem to be a clear textbook case of efficient and
responsive market functioning. It seems to show that normal
market mechanisms, namely wage increases, can dramatically and
quickly increase supply.

2.Guestworker Flows4

H-1B nonimmigrant visa use is dominated by the IT sector. Under
international trade law, the United States may not restrict the
annual number of H-1B visas to fewer than 65,000 annually, but
U.S. law has been amended to provide an additional 20,000 visas
for foreign STEM graduates of U.S. universities, and there is no
cap on the number of H-1Bs sponsored by nonprofit employers such
as universities.

The next largest visa used by STEM employers is the L-1 visa for
intracompany transferees. The L-1 has two categories, the L-1A
for executives and managers (it permits work for up to seven
years) and the L-1B for employees with ``specialized knowledge``
(it permits work for up to five years). Spouses and children of L-
1 workers may be admitted with an L-2 visa, which grants the L-2
holder work authorization for the same amount of time as the
principal L-1 holder. There are no caps on the L visa, and its
use has increased over time. An unknown but substantial
proportion of foreign students on F-1 nonimmigrant student visas
change status directly to the H-1B visa if sponsored by an
employer, while many other foreign students first work after
graduation through the Optional Practical Training (OPT) program.
The permitted stay to work under the OPT was two years in the
past, but it has been changed to 12 months. In 2008, however, the
program was extended by 17 months for graduates in STEM fields,
meaning that these graduates can work on OPT status for a total
of 29 months.5 Another temporary visa that often supplies workers
for IT jobs is the O-1 visa for workers of extraordinary ability
(10,590 total O-1 visas were issued in 2012).

Figure 6 shows the annual number of visas issued to guestworkers
in the relevant visa categories, i.e., the H-1B, the L, and
foreign-student OPT workers (see Appendix A for method and
calculations). The number of workers hired in these visa
categories has been growing over time. The H-1B trends reflect
the booming demand during the dot-com bubble years and a
congressional cap that was raised to 195,000 (it dropped down to
65,000 in 2003). The H-1B numbers dropped sharply after 2001,
only to rise again up until the recession of 2008. Use by
employers of all of the guestworker visa programs declined
following the crash of the economy in 2008, but it has been
increasing since that time. In FY2011, these guestworker visa
programs totaled 372,000 workers.

Note: Optional Practical Training (OPT)visa numbers for 2009,
2010, and 2011 are estimated based on the 2008 total reported by
the Department of Homeland Security The initial OPT estimates use
the OPT-extension ratioto initial OPT in 2008, and the OPT-STEM
extension statistics for 2007-2013 are used to estimate 2009,
2010, and 2011 initial OPT visas Source Department of State
(2012) and Department of Homeland Security (2008 and unpublished
DHS data)

The predominant employers of guestworkers are either in the IT
industry or in non-IT industries but with IT occupations to fill.
For the H-1B workers, about 50 percent are approved for
employment in formally defined IT occupations.6 There are no
official, detailed statistics on the occupational categories of L-
1 visa holders, but a 2006 study by the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) Office of the Inspector General (OIG) concluded
that the evidence suggested the L-1 visa was effectively ``The
Computer Visa.`` The study noted that, although ``the L-1 visa
program is not specifically tailored for the computer or
information technology (IT) industries, the positions L-1
applicants are filling are most often related to computers and
IT.`` In addition, ``...nine of the ten firms that petitioned for
the most L-1 workers were computer and IT related outsourcing
firms that specialize in labor from India...[and] almost 50
percent of the L-1B (specialized knowledge) petitions...named
beneficiaries...born in India.`` (DHS 2006, 4) Other analysts
have also concluded that the L-1 visa is primarily used for the
IT industry and IT occupations, and that the number of all L
visas has been steeply increasing since the Inspector General`s
report in 2006. There are no publicly available data on the
number of L-2 visa holders (for spouses of L-1 visa holders) who
have been granted employment authorization by DHS or where they
are employed. There are also no publicly available occupational
or employer data on initial OPT visas (the maximum 12-month work
permit provided to all college graduates on an F-1 visa), but we
obtained data on the 17-month OPT-STEM extension applicants for
2008 through early 2013. Our analysis found the vast majority (77
percent) were for IT occupations and/or IT firms (the other major
group is biomedical and pharmaceutical industries). Because these
guestworker programs are clearly used most intensively by the IT
industry and for IT occupations, we focus our analysis on the IT
workforce to identify the role of guestworkers and potential
workforce impacts.

The H-1B and F-1/OPT guestworker visa categories are primarily
for workers with at least a bachelor`s degree, though the H-1B
category does permit use of experience as a degree equivalent.7
Except for L-1 visas granted under a ``blanket`` petition, which
requires the worker to possess a college degree, the main L-1
visa categories do not have a college degree requirement; they
require only that the worker be coming to fill a
managerial/executive position (L-1A) or a position requiring
specialized knowledge (L-1B). However, the 2006 DHS OIG report
suggested that the L visa is more likely to be used by employers
to import workers with a foreign college degree of three years
instead of the U.S. standard of four years, than to hire those
without a college degree at all. The L-2 spousal/child visa has
no education, degree, or skill requirement (but the spouse may
work, unlike, say, the spouse of an H-1B visa holder). Given the
wide range of educational levels in the IT workforce,
guestworkers at many different education and skill levels could
be employed in the IT sector. The combined number of annual IT
guestworker entrants (of those with work visas eligible for
employment) for FY2011 is thus conservatively estimated to range
from 134,000 to 228,000.

The crucial question is: How significant is the flow of
guestworkers into the IT labor market? We first look at this flow
as consisting of the pool of eligible IT workforce entrants.
Ideally we would want to know how many job openings were filled
by guestworkers and how many were filled from the domestic labor
pool (again, the domestic labor pool comprises both citizens and
permanent residents). Unfortunately, the data on job openings in
the IT field are not available; the best data available to
address this question measure job tenure of those in IT
occupations.8 We examine the number of IT workers who began their
jobs in the year 2011 and were still employed in January 2012,
and we compare that to the number of guestworkers who were
approved for initial work in 2011. While the annual entry of
guestworkers could be taking IT jobs that were opening due to
turnover, as well as those newly created, we cannot ascertain
these two types of jobs separately. Because these are the only
reliable data available on new guestworker entrants, as well as
on total new IT jobs, we compare these two measures to gauge the
relative supply of guestworkers in the IT sector.9 We estimate
that during FY2011, 372,516 high-skill guestworkers were issued
visas to enter the U.S. labor market, and, of these workers,
between 134,000 and 228,500 were available for IT employment. We
use the mid-range estimate of 160,755 IT guestworkers for the
year FY2011.

Hiring and age/education of the IT workforce

In January 2012, 698,412 workers reported that they started an IT
job over the course of 2011. Our estimates of the number of
potential new guestworkers in IT fields equal, at the mid-range
estimate of 160,755, almost a quarter of all new hires in these
occupations. However, as discussed earlier, the IT workforce
comprises workers with a wide range of skills and education,
while the high-skill guestworker programs are specifically
designed to limit this guestworker population to those with
particular skills and/or a college degree. In fact, the data on
high-skill guestworkers show that nearly all have at least a
bachelor`s degree. We thus examine the characteristics of the new
guestworkers and jobs held by workers with similar educational
backgrounds and age groups. The population of IT workers with a
college degree (bachelor`s and above) who started their jobs
during 2011 is 483,692. Of these, the 160,755 guestworkers
represent approximately a third of all new IT jobs (specifically,
we estimate the number of guestworkers to range from a low of 28
percent to a high of 47 percent of the number of all IT jobs in
2011 that were filled by a college graduate hired in that year).
A third (34.3 percent) of workers who began their IT jobs in 2011
were under the age of 30; among guestworkers approved for H-1B
visas for initial employment in 2011, the under-30 share was 57
percent (DHS 2012). An even higher share of F-1/OPT guestworkers
are likely to be under the age of 30, since it is a benefit
extended to recent college graduates. A more detailed analysis of
the age distributions of U.S. workers beginning their IT jobs
during 2011 and H-1B guestworkers approved for initial employment
shows striking differences: More than half (52 percent) of new
U.S. IT hires were over the age of 35, compared to only 18
percent of H-1B new workers. If we examine IT new hires and IT
guestworkers under the age of 30 - the population of entry-level
and early-career workers we find that the number of new
guestworkers in 2012 was equal to nearly two-thirds (64%) the
number of all new hires under age 30 in the United States (Figure
7).

3. Who uses guestworkers and what is their role? The Role of U.S.
Guestworker Policy and Offshoring of IT work

The predominant demand for guestworkers is in the IT industry
and, within the IT industry, it is by the offshoring companies.
The use of guestworkers is required to support offshore IT
development because a portion of the team (often estimated as
about one-third of the entire project team) is dedicated to
managing the customer account in the United States, to do
requirements analysis, quality assurance, implementation, and
liaise with the offshore team. Without this onshore team, it
would be nearly impossible for a company to do offshore
development. It is, thus, not the case, as often asserted, that
without guestworkers firms would move their work offshore. It is,
in fact, quite the opposite: without guestworkers, conducting
work offshore would be much more difficult and the cost savings
would be substantially reduced. This finding is based partly on
field work (Salzman, 2000; Salzman and Biswas, 2001), but also
comes directly from the statements of offshoring companies in
their SEC filings (10-K and 20-F forms).

Infosys, one of the larger Indian IT consulting and services
firms, and one of the larger users of H-1B visas in 2013, states
that provisions in the early drafts of Senate legislation (no
longer in current versions such as I-Squared) that would ``..
.require employers to pay higher wages & conduct US worker
recruitment, and limit number of H-1B and L-1 workers in a
company`s U.S. workforce and ability of company to place H-1B and
L-1B workers at third party worksites...`` (Infosys, 20-F, 2014),
would lead to a situation where the ``.. .cost of doing business
would increase`` The result of such legislation would be that,
``Any restriction on ability to deploy trained offshore resources
at client locations may require Infosys to replace existing
offshore resources with local resources, or hire additional local
resources, potentially at higher wages.`` [emphasis added] This
is because, according to Infosys, the ``..majority of
professionals in the US hold H-1B visas or L-1 visas; ability of
our technology professionals to engage in work-related activity
abroad depends on ability to obtain the visas and
permits.``[emphasis added] Further, ``Reliance on work visas for
a significant number of technology professionals makes Infosys
particularly vulnerable to such changes and variations as it
affects our ability to staff projects with technology
professionals who are not citizens of the country where the work
is to be performed.``

It is worth noting that nowhere does Infosys state that it would
be unable to find sufficient workers in the U.S. and who are
eligible to work (i.e., U.S. citizen, permanent resident, or
current holders of work visas) but, rather, that it would raise
their costs and require them to change their business model to
one relying on U.S. hiring.

Another large IT offshoring company, WIPRO, discusses proposed
restrictions on guestworker visas as well. They note it would
affect their ``. ability to compete for and provide services to
clients in U.S.`` because they might not be able to ``...
continue to be able to obtain any or a sufficient number of H-1B
and L-1 visas for our onsite employees on the same timeframe as
we currently maintain.`` Interestingly, WIPRO discusses as a
potential risk to their business growth and revenue the increased
scrutiny of L visa workers by USCIS, noting in particular that it
would limit use of labor that is ``... essentially an arrangement
to provide labor for hire rather than in connection with the
employee`s specialized knowledge.`` It would seem the implication
is that such enforcement would curtail current practices.

It is not just the Indian offshore firms that note the impact of
potential restrictions on use of guestworkers. The U.S.
consulting firm Accenture, also a large H-1B employer with a
large offshore operation, notes in its 10-K that if it is ``...
unable to deploy needed talent because of increased regulation of
immigration or work visas, including limitations placed on number
of visas granted, limitations on type of work performed or
location in which work can be performed, and new or higher
minimum salary requirements, could be more difficult to staff
employees on client engagements and increase costs.`` Worth
noting is that the problem appears to be one of costs and
difficulty in offshore staff working in the U.S., but not a
potential ``shortage`` of workers.

Cognizant, a New Jersey based IT consulting company with large
offshore development operations, reports that the ``. US Congress
has recently considered and may consider in the future extensive
changes to US immigration laws regarding admission of high-
skilled temporary and permanent workers. If such provisions are
signed into law, cost of doing business in the US would
increase.. .[and would]... impair ability to staffprojects with
professionals who are not citizens of the country where the work
is to be performed.`` Their report further notes that ``... the
vast majority of our technical professionals in the United States
and Europe are Indian nationals who are able to work in the
United States and Europe only because they hold current visas and
work permits. Any inability to travel could cause us to incur
additional unexpected costs and expenses or could impair our
ability to retain the skilled professionals we need for our
operations.`` [emphasis added]

This review of selected company SEC filings about ``Quantitative
and Qualitative Disclosure About Market Risk`` finds that
companies that use offshore software development (both U.S. and
non-U.S. firms) have business models that depend upon access to
large numbers of guestworker visas. Further, that these
guestworker visas provide a cost advantage over hiring from the
U.S. labor force, as noted throughout the SEC disclosures.
Importantly, there is no mention by U.S. or non-U.S. companies
that guestworker visas provide labor that would otherwise be
unavailable in the U.S., only that using U.S. workers would
increase costs and make offshoring less profitable and
potentially uncompetitive with firms that did development work
solely or largely in the U.S.

4. Impacts

(1) Historical trends in wages

The impact of guestworkers on the labor market and wages can be
assessed through a number of different measures. As noted
earlier, we are examining multiple measures to understand
dominant trends and whether multiple measures are consistent in
indicating labor market impacts. We first examine several
different measures of wages: by occupation, by industry, by
geographical region. Then we examine wages, guestworker supply,
and computer science graduates trends. Beginning in the 1990s,
wages and employment rose steeply to a peak during the dot-com
boom. (This trend has been reviewed in recent research by Costa,
2012, Lazonick ,2009, and Matloff, 2013 as well as by other
researchers in recent years.) Through the 1990s and until 2004,
we observe the expected relationship between unemployment and
wages; in the 1990s unemployment was low and wages grew strongly,
both signs of growing demand for IT workers. After the bursting
of the dot-com bubble, a period of high unemployment was
accompanied by a tapering off of IT wage growth. However,
starting around 2004, a different pattern emerges. Although the
recovery of the 2000s brought down unemployment and increased
employment, wage growth never resumed. These flat wages do not
appear to reflect a level of unmet demand.

A more detailed analysis of the IT industry has been undertaken
by Lazonick (2009),10 who focused on four key information and
communication technology areas: semiconductors (SC), software
publishing (SP), computer programming (CP), and computer system
design (CS), with data up to 2006. Figure 8 updates the data to
2010.11 Lazonick`s analyses also examine the employment and wage
trends in different industry segments and regions, with
particular focus on the high-tech regions of Silicon Valley in
California, the Route 128 corridor in Massachusetts, and the
cities of Dallas and Austin in Texas. The trends in each of these
labor markets show similar patterns: steep increases in
employment and wages during the dot-com boom, a collapse in 2001,
and then increases in employment and wages in some industry
segments and regions (but still well below the peaks of 2000)
until the crash of 2008.12

There are important differences in trends by region and
occupation. Policy discussions about the IT and guestworker labor
markets tend to focus on Silicon Valley and big product companies
like Apple. But as the following figures show, the Silicon Valley
pattern in employment and wage levels is not representative of
the industry as whole. For example, a sharp increase in computer
system design employment in Silicon Valley in 2010 was primarily
the result of the dramatic growth of employment at Apple in
response to the success of the iPhone and the launch of the iPad,
but significant employment and compensation increases were not
observed in other locations. Programming employment exhibited the
strongest growth during the dot-com boom and again before the
2008 recession, but computer design and semiconductor employment
experienced no recovery. Programming is the lower-paid and
generally lower-skilled of the occupations, and there is a
secular decline in wages over the past decade; in many cases they
even fall below the lowest levels reached after the dot-com crash
(Figure 8).

Even in the dynamic technology regions of Silicon Valley, Route
128, Dallas, and Austin, the local earnings data shown in Figure
9 for workers in computer programming and computer system design
reveal no signs of the rising wages that would be expected to
occur if employers were hiring in a market that had a limited
supply of workers.

(2) H-1B workers and IT wages

The overall wage trends, as shown above and in detailed in
Salzman et al., (2013) and Lazonick (2009), and many other
studies demonstrate a pattern of largely stagnant wages that
suggest a sufficient, and perhaps ample supply of workers in most
regions and computer occupations. As the example of petroleum
engineers shows, a tight labor supply will be reflected in wage
increases and a consequent increase in supply. Conversely, as a
Brookings report observes, ``it is likely that the extra supply
of foreign-born workers does bring downward pressure on the wages
of incumbent workers, as research suggests`` (Rothwell and Ruiz,
2013).

In examining wage and both domestic and guestworker supply, we
can observe several trends that may explain the flat salaries
shown in the analysis in the previous section. As shown in Figure
10, in the late 1990s through early 2000s wages were increasing
as was the number of computer science graduates and guestworkers.
This was due to the high demand of Y2K remediation work and the
growing dot-com bubble as well as general IT growth. When the dot-
com bubble burst, wages fell and both U.S. computer science
graduate enrollments and guestworker numbers declined (with a lag
in graduates because those already enrolled at the time of the
crash completed their degrees in the subsequent two to three
years). However, as the IT industry recovered, we observe sharp
increases in the number of guestworkers but a continued decline
in U.S. computer science graduates and continued declines and
stagnation of salaries. It was during this period that there was
the great ``crew shift`` to using guestworkers both in the U.S.
and a significant increase in offshore IT development, which
relies on guestworkers in the U.S. and transfer of work to
offshore teams. All these factors would suggest there was a
fundamental structural change in the IT labor market that allowed
firms to have an ample workforce supply without having to raise
wages.

Figure 11 shows our preliminary analysis of the U.S. workforce
and H-1B workforce in the same IT occupations. There is
substantial average wage savings gain by using H-1B workers,
which we estimate now comprise over 40 percent of the workforce
in these occupations (the data on the U.S. workforce provides
occupational detail but the H-1B data combine these two computer
occupations). What is remarkable is that these workforce
averages, which are for all workers in these occupations with a
Bachelors degree or higher, are lower for the H-1B workforce yet
it is a workforce comprised of nearly twice the proportion of
workers with a Masters degree. That is, despite a workforce
composed of a substantially greater number of workers with a post-
graduate degree (nearly twice the proportion), their average
wages are lower. In a preliminary analysis of wages and
education, Lowell and Salzman (in preparation) find that, as
would be expected in the labor market, U.S. workers with a
Masters degree receive higher wages than those with a Bachelors
degree, and it is a wage premium that increases among older
workers with a Masters degree. However, in the H-1B workforce
there is, on average, no wage premium for a Masters degree. That
is, for most H-1B workers with a Masters degree, they do not earn
more than an H-1B worker with a Bachelors degree. We discuss the
implications of this finding in more detail in the next section.

5. ``Green Cards for Grads``

In response to the ``handcuff provisions of H-1B visas (e.g.,
employer sponsorship that limits mobility), various policies such
as those in the I-Squared Act would increase the speed, ease, and
availability of green cards for STEM graduates. The justification
is that, by providing free labor market mobility to workers they
can obtain market wages and that they won`t be ``sent home``
after receiving a U.S. education. This is presumed to provide a
benefit to the U.S. as well as preventing them from ``competing
against us.`` Although a well-intentioned response to the
documented abuses of the H-1B program, the I-Squared and other
green card proposals do not appear to consider the evidence about
the impact of the current H-1B, CPT, OPT, and OPT-extension
programs on higher education and impact in the STEM labor market.

First, although the assertion that ``we`re educating them and
then sending them home,`` is widespread and oft-repeated, there
is scant evidence available to accurately assess this claim. The
one study that did examine Ph.D. graduates found there has been
no change in the return rate (Finn, 2012). One informal follow up
that was done of cases reported in the media found none had, in
fact, been compelled to leave because of an inability to obtain a
visa (Matloff, 2014). Matloff concludes: ``The lobbyists` claims
that we are losing outstanding technological talents to our
competitor nations due to low visa caps is just false. There must
be some examples somewhere, but the examples given by the
advocates themselves just don`t support their claims.``13 In
earlier work that Leonard Lynn, Pamela Meil and I conducted of
technology entrepreneurs in India and China (Lynn, et al.,,
2012), we found that those returning had all done so because they
wanted to live and work in their home country (often after many
years, and professional success, in the U.S.). That is, the
``pull`` factors to home country seem to be the primary
motivating factor rather than ``push`` factors in the U.S.

Second, the ``loss`` of graduates is often described as the
potential loss of the next google founder, or other innovator.
This claim is not based on any evidence, the cases cited are
anecdotal and often not illustrative of the claim (e.g., google`s
co-founder, Brin, immigrated as a child with his family leaving
the dissolving Soviet Union) and, importantly, fail to consider
the evidence about the predominant types of students and jobs the
colleges and visa programs support. That is, these guestworker
programs are largely to support offshore development work and
generally for routine programming work, not the innovation work
that makes headlines.

Third, and perhaps most importantly, the incentives provided by
easy U.S. labor market entry as now exists with the CPT, OPT, OPT-
extension, and H-1B programs have led to growth of graduate
programs that, at the extreme, are fraudulent programs (Bartlett,
Fischer, and Keller 2011), but in the main have grown to target
foreign students as part of a business model to generate revenue
rather than provide a high quality, graduate-level education.
These are programs in lower-tier schools and programs in higher
ranked schools but are structured to serve foreign students with
a lower quality education. The institutions with some of the
highest ratios of OPT-STEM extension awards to enrollments
(Stratford University, University of Bridgeport, and Northwestern
Polytechnic University; see Figure 12) were found by a 2011
Chronicle of Higher Education investigation to target foreign
students as the primary population for their programs (Bartlett,
Fischer, and Keller 2011). These colleges specialize in acquiring
student visas and (for students with F-1 visas) OPT employment
authorization for their students. In addition to tuition,
students are often charged up to $3,000 in fees for obtaining the
work authorization. At some universities, such as Tri-Valley
University in California, the authors of the Chronicle study
report that students do not even attend classes; the business
model was ``selling permission to live and work in the United
States on student visas.`` Institutions specializing in acquiring
OPT employment authorization for their students that do not act
as egregiously as Tri-Valley University still keep their
instructional expenses down with substantial reliance on online
education, or they hold classes only occasionally throughout the
semester.

Abuses have been found in some college programs responding to
high foreign-student demand for entry into the U.S. IT labor
market. These colleges also appear to be serving the labor demand
of some firms that hire students without even minimal college-
level education and without much, if any, apparent IT experience
or background. In other segments of the college market, even in
well-established schools, there appears to be extensive use of
the OPT extension (suggesting that there are students who are
unable to find regular employment even a year after graduating),
and programs are expanding by targeting foreign student
enrollments. Providing permanent residency for STEM graduates
could have quite significant impacts on the education system as
well as the labor market. Further analysis of the OPT programs
would provide a better understanding of those potential impacts.

Figures 13 and 14 show colleges, grouped by Carnegie Class, that
have the largest percentage of their computer science masters
students on a student F-visa. As these charts show, these are
colleges that appear to have programs largely if not almost
exclusively serving foreign students. These enrollment patterns
reflect a business model for these colleges; Masters programs
generate high revenue and because entry into the U.S. labor
market is relatively easy, it becomes a means of expanding the
labor supply. Interestingly, our preliminary analysis finds that
the vast majority of H-1B IT workers with a Masters degree have
little to no wage premium over an IT worker with a Bachelors
degree, suggesting that these Masters programs are not providing
students a Masters level education but, rather, the entry-level
skills into the IT field (U.S. students with Masters degrees in
computer science do have a wage premium over U.S. Bachelors
students).

In summary, any expansion of foreign student entry into the U.S.
labor market in IT is likely to exacerbate rather than remediate
the current, negative impacts of large guestworker flows on the
labor market. Further, and very importantly, it is likely to
exacerbate what appears to be growth of a college and university
business model of providing entry into the U.S. labor market that
would otherwise be difficult if not impossible to obtain; the
provisions of the I-Squared legislation could expand the numbers
of Masters degree programs that are primarily offering degrees as
the cost of obtaining a green card, easy entry into the U.S.
labor market, and perhaps a moderate level of skill and
education. The evidence suggests the impact would be depressing
wages, as is currently reflected by the current lack of a wage
premium for H-1B Masters degree holders and growth of degree
programs that exclude U.S. students, either indirectly (as
evident in the colleges with high concentration of F-visa
graduates) or directly, as in the case of California State
University-East Bay, which stopped admitting state residents into
its graduate programs and admitted almost exclusively
international students into its computer science program (which
is about 90 percent international students).14 This was the
University`s explicitly stated strategy to increase revenue to
make up for budget deficits by excluding state residents who
would pay lower tuition rates than out-of-state and international
students. As the chart above suggests, this appears to be a
business model pursued by a number of colleges and universities
across the country.

Summary and Concluding Remarks

Our analysis of the data finds that high-skill guest worker
programs supply the preponderance of all new hires for the IT
industry. The inflow of guest workers is equal to half of all IT
hires each year and fully two-thirds of annual hires of workers
younger than 30.

As the wage analyses show, wages in IT jobs have been stagnant
for over a decade while guestworkers have steadily increased, now
comprising 40 percent or more of some computer occupations. The
evidence strongly indicates that the current levels of
guestworker supply are a key factor in the depressed wages of
U.S. IT workers, by both providing a large supply of entry-level
workers that can substitute for U.S. workers, and particularly
older workers. Important to note is that the large supply of
guestworkers is required by IT services firms for offshore
development. That is, as stated in these companies` SEC filings,
without a large supply of guestworkers, they would be unable to
move IT work offshore at competitive rates. At the very least,
they would have to hire U.S. workers for the portion of their
workforce on assignment in the U.S.

As increases in the supply of guestworkers are being debated and
proposals developed to speed the path to green cards, U.S.
colleges are already graduating more than twice as many science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) graduates than the number
of STEM openings generated by our economy each year. In short,
the overwhelming evidence does not support a need for the
escalating numbers of new guestworkers called for in the Senate`s
S744 legislation or the I-Squared legislation. As Figure 15
shows, increases of the magnitude proposed would supply
guestworkers for more than 100 percent of the industry`s hiring
needs. Such increases can only exacerbate current trends of
stagnant wages and poor career opportunities in IT and STEM
fields. In particular, the likely impact of large-scale guest
worker programs, which stand to hurt all STEM graduates, will
have especially negative impacts on minorities who are
underrepresented in high-tech, as well as other, recently arrived
foreign-born workers who compete most with newcomers.

Labor Markets and the Economy

Markets are supposed to reflect demand through the price
mechanism of markets. In the case of labor, the ``price`` is
wages. How can it be, then, that if the IT industry is
experiencing labor shortages, wage levels in this highly
profitable industry are no higher than they were in the last
millennium? How can an industry expect to attract the best
workers without raising wages? Is there what economists call a
``market failure`` here? As the evidence presented suggests, STEM
labor markets do work as expected. In the case of petroleum
engineers, shortages led to wage increases which, in turn, led to
near tripling of graduates. There is no plausible explanation for
the observed IT labor market trends and outcomes other than,
quite simply, large supplies of guestworkers that allow many
firms to swap out higher-paid, high-skill domestic workers for
lower-paid guestworkers, as found by many researcher including a
Brookings Institution study that concluded ``it is likely that
the extra supply of foreign-born workers does bring downward
pressure on the wages of incumbent workers, as research
suggests`` (Rothwell and Ruiz, 2013) All the evidence suggests
the IT labor market is still bound by the usual dynamics of
supply and demand. When we look at the trends of the past 20
years, we see that when wages increase, the number of computer
science graduates increases. When wages fall, the number of
graduates falls. When the supply of guestworkers increases, wages
stay flat, and too many domestic students must find employment in
other fields.

Some commentators argue that this last result is good for the
economy: science and engineering skills are now being used in
millions of non-STEM jobs. But an alternative view is that far
too many domestic STEM graduates are in jobs that do not fully
use their education, which represents a loss of our greatest
source of innovators. Moreover, students observing these trends
pursue careers outside of STEM fields, putting their talents to
work in industries such as finance and law but not contributing
to the innovation that drives the long-term and sustainable
strength of the nation.

Yes, employers claim they have thousands of unfilled job
openings, but the evidence is hardly compelling. Only about half
to two-thirds of engineering graduates find engineering jobs and
fewer than half of graduating Ph.D. scientists find career jobs.
At the largest IT jobs website DICE.com, over half of the
advertisements are for contract, short-term and part-time jobs
assuming these jobs exist at all. But even if they are available,
these are not the types of jobs that U.S. graduates will find
attractive, nor are they the types of jobs that will allow these
graduates to pay off student loans, much less enter the middle
class. Those on the front lines of IT now tell students that
given the industry`s stagnant wages and unstable career tracks,
better students should seek jobs elsewhere. An extensive survey
of a recent college cohort by the National Center for Educational
Statistics corroborates their advice. Only two-thirds of computer
science graduates went into IT jobs in 2009. Of those not landing
an IT job, half said they found a better job elsewhere. Fully one
third reported there were no IT jobs available.

This was also the finding in our analysis of changes in the
composition of STEM graduates going into STEM jobs over the past
three decades (Lowell, et al., 2009). We found that although the
overall supply remained strong, fewer of the highest performing
students were going into STEM jobs.

Meanwhile studies by Peter Cappelli of the Wharton School and by
Burt Barnow of George Washington University find a decrease in
the intensity of firms` recruitment efforts since the recession
and an increase in pickiness about whom they are willing to hire.
Again, the inference seems obvious: the supply of potential
workers is already plentiful relative to employer demand. This
should be the evidence that guides current legislation rather
than anecdotal accounts and thin claims about the need for
guestworkers and the U.S. falling behind in the global high-tech
talent search.

H-1B guestworkers are concentrated in computer programmer and
system analyst jobs; in fact, they fill 85 percent of them. But
most of these are commodity-like production jobs in IT services,
doing back office programming for companies. A disproportionate
number of H-1Bs provide onshore customer management for offshore
programming teams. Ironically, without the visas, much of the
programming work couldn`t have been offshored in the first place.

There may be highly innovative guestworkers, but most are in jobs
far away from the innovation frontier. The Economic Policy
Institute`s Ron Hira found that few of the largest H-1B employers
could be considered technology innovators, with most generating
very low levels of patents. So an often-heard argument for a
massive increase in guestworkers that we`ll gain a few key
innovators for America is in reality a high stakes lottery with
few winners but, like most lotteries, many losers. Large
increases in the number of guestworkers will not ensure that we
admit, among the tens of thousands of guestworkers, the few
geniuses who could make a decisive contribution relative to
American workers. If the intent of guestworker and immigration
policy is to attract the high performing students and workers
with potential to innovate and make substantial contributions to
the economy, a much different set of polices is needed than those
currently proposed.

In Summary

Currently, U.S. colleges graduate far more scientists and
engineers than find employment in those fields every year about
200,000 more while the IT industry fills about two-thirds of its
entry-level positions with guest workers. At the same time, IT
wages have stagnated for over a decade. We cannot expect to build
a strong STEM workforce and encourage domestic innovation by
developing policies that undermine the quality of STEM jobs.
Before asking government to intervene in labor markets by handing
out more guestworker visas and green cards to STEM graduates, we
should ask for audits of shortage claims and workforce impacts as
a first step toward developing evidence-based policy on this
issue, an issue critical to the nation`s future. Asking domestic
graduates, both native-born and immigrant, to compete with guest
workers on wages is not a winning strategy for strengthening U.S.
science, technology and innovation.