Body




Statement of Amitai Etzioni, Ph.D.
Professor of International Affairs, Director, Institute of
Communitarian Policy Studies,
The George Washington University

Committee on House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific

September 22, 2016

Several American analysts point to the modernization of the
Chinese military; its development of anti-access, area denial
capabilities; China`s rapid economic growth; and its expansionist
conduct, especially the building up of some islands in the South
China Sea-as indications that sooner or later the US will go to
war with China. They hence advocate increased military budgets,
placement of US troops and warships in the area, military
alliances with nations on the border of China, and drawing a
redline when it comes to the contested islands.

As I see it, the Chinese military buildup is coming from a very
low base, and is far from approaching that of the US. The
difference is highlighted by the fact that China now has one
aircraft carrier while the US has eleven. The anti-access, anti-
ship missiles are mainly defensive weapons, of concern for
anybody who wants to attack China but otherwise do not threaten
the US or its allies. China`s economic growth is slowing and its
income per capita is and will be for decades well below that of
the US. It is close to that of El Salvador. The fate of the
contested islands should be settled as part of a much more all-
encompassing bargain with China, rather than turned into a major
issue in its own right, a test of China`s good character or of US
credibility and fortitude.

Above all, I note that the US and China have many shared and
complementary interests and very few real reasons for conflict.
These shared interests include preventing the spread of terrorism
(obviously a major concern for the U.S. and its allies but also
for China where Uighur separatists have launched attacks against
the government since the 1990s); non-proliferation of nuclear
arms (China voted with the US in 2016 at the UN to board all
ships on their way to or from North Korea to ensure that they do
not carry nuclear materials); global financial stability;
preventing the spread of pandemics; and environmental protection,
in particular climate change. In addition, the US has a major
interest in making major investments in nation building at home
and not in continuing to increase military expenditures in
preparing for a war with China.

The remaining issues can be settled best if both sides focus on
the issues most important to them. The US` number one security
risk in Asia is a North Korea armed with nuclear and chemical
weapons, long range missiles, and an unpredictable dictator. If
it attacks South Korea or Japan, the US will be dragged into a
war, which it is sure to win but only after devastating costs to
its allies and its status. China has the leverage to compel North
Korea to change course, but it has to be incentivized to proceed
because of the costs to itself of twisting North Korea`s arms.
This is the case because first, China fears that if the regime in
Pyongyang collapses, many millions of North Koreans will flee
into China, and it will have to accommodate them. Second, that
following the unification of Korea, the US will move its troops
to the border with China.

It is hence not enough for the US to call on China or try to
shame China into pressing North Korea to give up its nuclear arms
buildup. First of all, it has to informally negotiate an
agreement with China that the area that is now North Korea would
not be occupied by either side and that the nuclear arms there
now will be destroyed rather than added to China`s arsenal. In
return, the US has to commit itself to not placing a nuclear
missile shield in South Korea. China has reasons to be concerned
about such a shield because it could be used to undermine its
nuclear deterrent. Other incentives may well be needed, for
instance, stopping the near daily American intelligence flights
up and down Chinese coastlines, which are of very limited use for
the US and very antagonizing to China.

The second major US security interest in Asia is to ensure that
terrorists are unable to get their hands on nuclear weapons in
Pakistan (something they have already tried six times). Given
that China is the primary source of arms and investments for
Pakistan, this second US security objective may be achieved if,
as part of the grand bargain, the US agrees to stop helping India
develop its nuclear arsenal and stops pushing its military build-
up to counter China.

Several additional examples follow. One may well dispute one or
the other, but the main purpose is to illustrate elements of a
grand bargain approach.

Clarifying Intentions Regarding Taiwan

Making explicit that which is viewed by many as an implicit
understanding between China and the United States regarding the
status of Taiwan would constitute a major step toward defusing
tensions between the two powers. The governments of both the
United States and China have already demonstrated considerable
self-restraint in the matter of Taiwan. Beijing has not yielded
to demands from those who call for employing force as a means of
``reclaiming`` Taiwan as part of the mainland; meanwhile,
Washington has not yielded to Americans who urge the recognition
of Taiwan as an independent country. These measures of self-
restraint should be made more explicit by letting it be known
that so long as China does not use force to coerce Taiwan to
become part of China, the United States will continue to refrain
from treating Taiwan as an independent state.

One may ask whether it is not best to let sleeping dogs lie. One
reason to clarify both sides` policies is that hawks in both
nations use the cause of Taiwan to justify building up the United
States` and China`s respective military forces in an era in which
it is necessary for both nations to focus on economic, social,
and environmental issues at home. A 2013 report to Congress from
the Department of Defense concurs, stating, ``Preparing for
potential conflict in the Taiwan Strait appears to remain the
principal focus and primary driver of China`s military
investment.``

Moreover, China carried out a military exercise in which the PLA
simulated ``a Normandy-style invasion`` of Taiwan.ii In the
United States, a 2003 report from the Council on Foreign
Relations examined China's growing military power and held that
``minimizing the chances that a cross-strait crisis will occur
means maintaining the clear ability and willingness to counter
any application of military force against Taiwan.``iii Making an
explicit commitment to maintain the status quo of Taiwan, unless
the people of Taiwan freely and peacefully choose otherwise,
would significantly reduce tensions between the United States and
China.

Cyberspace

A grand bargain is particularly important for restraining the
proliferation of weapons such as cyber arms that favor those who
strike first. Such weapons are particularly destabilizing because
they offer tangible incentives to strike before being struck,
thereby increasing the probability that a country possessing them
will escalate a situation. Cyber arms, roughly defined, are
malicious computer programs designed to conduct espionage or to
disable or destroy physical infrastructure. Because espionage has
been a reality of international relations for as long as nations
have existed and because ``kinetic`` cyber weapons remain rare,
it seems likely that any new shared understandings of vetted self-
restraint in the realm of information technology will center on
those cyber tools capable of causing physical damage rather than
those that collect intelligence.

A draft code that seeks to forestall conflicts involving cyber
arms has already been proposed. In September 2011, four countries-
China, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan-submitted an
``International Code of Conduct for Information Security`` to UN
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. The draft calls for a ``consensus
on the international norms and rules standardizing the behavior
of countries concerning information and cyberspace at an early
date.`` The document further asks states to pledge ``not to use
[information and communication technologies] including networks
to carry out hostile activities or acts of aggression and pose
threats to international peace and security.``

Critics have found fault in this draft, suggesting the draft may
lead to increased state censorship and control of the Internet;
however, these critics have failed to propose an alternate text.
It seems more constructive to amend and modify the suggested text
rather than to dismiss it out of hand.

A Buffer Zone

The United States formed military alliances with, signed
agreements allowing the placement of American troops and other
military assets in, and conducted joint military exercises with
many of the countries neighboring China. The United States views
these arrangements as agreements between sovereign nations, a way
of burden sharing, and part of a drive to contain or ``counter-
balance`` China; however, China perceives these moves as an
attempt at Cold War-era encirclement. China has also sought
military alliances of its own with neighboring countries, adding
to tensions in the region.

These moves position American and Chinese military forces closer
to each other, a proximity that could potentially lead to
accidental clashes and conflicts. This risk has been highlighted
by multiple incidents, including the April 2001 collision of a
U.S. Navy surveillance aircraft with a People`s Liberation Army
Navy (PLAN) fighter jet over the South China Sea approximately 65
miles southeast of China`s Hainan Island, and an encounter
between a PLAN Jianghu III-class frigate and an American
surveillance ship in the Yellow Sea near South Korea nine days
earlier.

Moreover, the various treaties and understandings between
countries in East and Southeast Asia and either China or the
United States have given several states in the region ``a finger
on the trigger`` of a gun belonging to their superpower sponsor
by stipulating that if the nation in question enters a war with
one superpower, the other superpower will come to its aid. Some
treaties explicitly entail such a commitment (e.g., the Treaty of
Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and
Japan, which is said to cover the Senkaku Islands). Others are
ambiguous and easily misconstrued by the countries involved
(e.g., the Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and
the Philippines and the relationship between China and North
Korea).

It is therefore particularly troubling that some of these smaller
states have engaged in provocative behavior. Such provocative
behavior could not only lead to war between them and other states
in the region but could also drag both superpowers into a
confrontation with each other.

A grand bargain might include an agreement to treat states that
share land borders with China similarly to the way Austria was
treated during the Cold War: as a buffer zone. (One additional
model is that of East Germany following reunification; a 1990
agreement between Germany and the USSR stipulated that although
the former East Germany would be given the status of NATO
territory, neither NATO troops nor nuclear weapons would be
stationed in these parts.vi) Both powers would be free to
continue engaging these countries economically by investing,
trading, and providing foreign aid, to share information, and to
promote educational programs. However, neither the United States
nor China would be permitted to extend any new military
commitments to countries in the buffer zone, and both would be
required to gradually phase out existing military commitments.
The grand bargain could also stipulate a limit to joint military
exercises and the placement of military assets in this zone.
Above all, both powers would make it clear to their allies that
they should not assume the automatic, guaranteed involvement of
the United States or China if they engage in armed conflict or
war with either of these two powers.

Pathways

China is highly dependent on the import of raw materials and
energy, a great deal of which reaches China via the sea. China
sees itself as highly vulnerable because the United States, which
has a strong naval presence in the region, could readily block
these imports. Some American commentators openly discuss the
option of such a blockade, which is considered a moderate way of
confronting China relative to the Air-Sea Battle concept.

In response to these concerns and as a result of its broader
interest in commercial expansion, China increased its naval
presence in the South China Sea and developed a network of ports-
termed the ``string of pearls``-in the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
Additionally, China attempted to reduce the country`s reliance on
shipping lanes by developing plans, including new Silk Roads, for
transporting oil and gas resources by land. Indeed, a system of
roads, railways, and pipelines now extends across continental
Asia.

Some Americans view these pathways as a sign of China`s
expansionist tendencies and interest in asserting global
dominance. Meanwhile, some Chinese view American opposition to
select pathways, for instance a pipeline from Iran to China, as
attempts to contain China`s rise.

The United States should assume-unless clear evidence is
presented to the contrary-that extending land-based pathways for
the flow of energy resources and raw materials will make China
less inclined to build up its military, particularly the naval
forces needed to secure ocean pathways-a win-win for both powers.

Responsibility to Protect, No Coercive Regime Changes

In 2005, 188 countries, including China and the United States,
endorsed the responsibility to protect doctrine (R2P).
Accordingly, the international community pledged ``to use
appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other means to protect
populations`` from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and
crimes against humanity if a state fails to meet its primary
obligation to protect its own people.

However, in 2011, the UK, France, and the United States turned an
armed humanitarian intervention aimed at preventing the large-
scale killing of civilians in Libya into a coercive regime
change. When the ongoing humanitarian crisis developed in Syria
in 2011, Western powers openly called for not only ending the
civil war but also forcing President Bashar al-Assad out of
power. Russia, supported by China, strongly opposed these
interventions. The two countries invoked the long-established
Westphalian norm of sovereignty, which holds that no state should
interfere by use of force in the internal affairs of another
nation.

It follows that if the United States and its European allies
limit their future armed humanitarian interventions only to
instances of genocide and other crimes outlined in the original
R2P resolution, eschewing intervention for the purposes of regime
change, China (and Russia) might very well reactivate its support
for R2P, benefitting all nations and peoples. Such self-imposed
restraint on the conditions under which armed humanitarian
interventions could proceed would further serve to defuse
tensions and reduce grounds for conflict between the United
States and China.

In conclusion

Several leading political scientists have argued that history
shows that whenever a new power arises and the established super
power does not make some accommodations with the rising power,
war will ensue. This was indeed the case in 12 out of 16 such
historical situations. Among the important exceptions was the way
that the UK accommodated the rise of the US. To avoid the US
becoming involved in a war with China, one notes that the two
countries have many shared and complementary interests and very
few truly divergent ones. Those could be settled, not by the US
making unilateral concessions to China, but through a grand
bargain. I have outlined some potential elements of such a
bargain. It may well take other forms, however both sides have
strong reasons to engage in it, and to counter the current drift
toward war.