Body




Statement of Leon Aron, Ph.D.
Resident Scholar and Director of Russian Studies
American Enterprise Institute

Committee on House Foreign Affairs

June 14, 2016

The American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research
(AEI) is a nonpartisan, nonprofit, 501(c)(3) educational
organization and does not take institutional positions on any
issues. The views expressed in this testimony are those of the
author.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Chairman, the Ranking Members, Members of the Committee!

It is an honor and a pleasure to be here especially in the
company of colleagues and friends whose expertise and integrity I
have greatly admired over many years: Jack Matlock and Mike
McFaul. I don`t have to remind anyone in this room that this is a
tough, even rough, patch in the relations between the United
States and Russia.

There are many reasons for this troubling state of affairs, and
both sides bear responsibility. But I would like to attempt to
explore one of the key elements of the present situation:
Vladimir Putin`s credo, his vision of Russia in the world, and
his understanding of his role as Russia`s leader. I want to do
this because, contrary to a rather popular view, I don`t believe
that his foreign policy, and in particular the regime`s relations
with the United States, is made on an ad hoc basis. Instead, it
is part of a long-term geopolitical project, rooted in deeply
held ideology, a self-imposed personal historic mission, and
domestic political imperatives of his regime`s survival.

The Russian president is not the easiest man to read. They have
taught him well in the KGB Higher School and in the Yuri Andropov
Red Banner Institute (formerly the Foreign Intelligence Academy).
But after 16 years of policymaking, there are a few tenets in
Putin`s credo we can be fairly certain about:

-- The end of the Cold War was Russia`s equivalent of the
Versailles Treaty for Germany a source of endless humiliation and
misery.

-- The demise of the Soviet Union, in Putin`s words, was ``the
greatest geopolitical tragedy of the 20th century.``

-- The overarching strategic agenda of any truly patriotic
Russian leader (not an idiot or a traitor or both, as Putin
almost certainly views Gorbachev and Yeltsin) is to recover and
repossess the political, economic, and geostrategic assets lost
by the Soviet state at its fall. A few years back, I called this
program the Putin Doctrine, which the Russian president proceeded
to implement virtually from Day One of his first presidential
term in 2000.

But I believe there is another, broader and deeper basis for the
policies of the Putin regime a set of beliefs that binds many,
perhaps most, key political actors in Russia today, especially
the cohort close to Putin, the so-called siloviki: top members of
special and secret services, many of them graduates, like Putin,
of the Soviet KGB. They believe and there is plenty of evidence
in their articles and interviews1 that Russia is ``menaced by an
external force`` with the ``greatest threats coming from NATO and
the United States.2

A West at war with Russia is the staple of the Russian state`s
propaganda, which is why Putin called the Europe-bound Ukraine
``NATO`s foreign legion.``

See, for example, Andrei Soldatov and Michael Rochlitz,
``Siloviki in Russian Politics,`` unpublished paper. In addition
to the KGB training, these views are also shaped by Putin`s s
favorite philosopher, Ivan Ilyin, whom the Russian president
cites in his speeches and whose remains he had moved from
Switzerland and interred on the grounds of one of Russia`s most
hallowed grounds: the Donskoy Monastery in Moscow. Like Ilyin,
Putin believes that Russia is never wrong, but is perennially
wronged by the West. The West`s hostility to Russia is eternal
and prompted by the West`s jealousy of Russia`s size, natural
riches, and, most of all, its incorruptible, saintly soul and a
God-bestowed mission to be the Third Rome, the light among
nations. The plots against Russia are relentless, and while
truces are possible (and often tactically advantageous to
Russia), genuine peace with the West is very unlikely.

Following his boss`s lead, Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov stated
in a recent article that it is ``in the genes`` of the Russian
people`` to defeat ``attempts of the European West to completely
subjugate Russia, and to deny [Russia] its national identity and
religious faith.``3 Consistent with the view of the West`s
perennial plotting against Russia, Lavrov also contended that
World War II was caused by the ``anti-Russian European elites
[who] had sought to push Hitler to attack the Soviet Union.``4
And today, too, Lavrov continued:

We see how the US and the Western alliance it leads try to
preserve their dominance by any means possible. . . . The use all
sorts of pressures, including economic sanctions and even direct
military intervention. [The US] wages large-scale information
wars. It has perfected the technology of the change of regimes by
implementing ``color revolutions.``5

In addition to ideology, the foreign policy of the Putin
government is shaped in large part by a powerful domestic
political imperative. By the time of Putin`s third presidential
term, the toxic domestic economic climate had reduced Russian
economic growth to a crawl, even with oil prices at historical
highs. Russian economists inside and outside the government
warned that, even if oil prices stayed just as high or even
climbed higher, the Russian economy would no longer deliver the 8-
10 percent growth in real incomes, as it had between 2000 and
2008, securing Putin`s astronomic popularity. Public opinion
polls consistently revealed people`s perception of the
authorities at every level as deeply corrupt, callous, and
incompetent. Most troubling for the regime, Putin`s popularity,
which was and continues to be the foundation of the regime`s
legitimacy, dropped by almost one-third between 2008 and 2011.6
In the words of Putin`s personal friend, former Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Finance Alexei Kudrin, Russia`s economy
by 2013 had hit an ``institutional wall`` and needed a different
``economic model.``

Yet if Vladimir Putin has a professional or perhaps even personal
nightmare, it is likely Gorbachev`s perestroika, that is, an
effort at economic liberalization that leads to an uncontrollable
political crisis and eventually the collapse of the regime.

Unwilling, therefore, to undertake liberalizing institutional
reforms, Putin has made likely the most fateful decision of his
political career: He began to shift the foundation of his
regime`s legitimacy from economic progress and the steady growth
of incomes to what might be called patriotic mobilization. The
new policy rested on two propaganda narratives. (1) Russia is
rising from its knees and because of that the West, first and
foremost the United States, declared war on Moscow in order to
preserve its diktat in world affairs. (2) Although threatened on
all sides by implacable enemies, Russia has nothing to fear so
long as Putin is at the helm: Not only will he protect the
Motherland, but also he will recover the Soviet Union`s status of
being feared and therefore respected again! On national
television, where an overwhelming majority of Russians get their
news, foreign policy has become a mesmerizing kaleidoscope of
breathtaking initiatives and brilliant successes.

There followed the annexation of Crimea and the hybrid war in
Ukraine and then Russia`s involvement in Syria.

Thus far, the regime`s patriotic mobilization must be judged a
great success. A patriotic fervor at the sight of the Motherland
besieged yet somehow also victorious; a Russia that again, as in
the Soviet days, is mightily shaping world events along with the
United States and acting as a moral and strategic counterweight
to America has obscured for millions of Russians the increasingly
bleak economic reality and repression at home. As the great
Russian poet Mikhail Lermontov put it in the poem Ismail-Bey,
``Puskay ya rab, no rab tsarya vsellenoy!``: ``Yes, I am a slave
but I am a slave of the master of the Universe!``

Vladimir Putin appears to have stepped on the Stalin-Brezhnev-
Hussein-Gaddafi president-for-life escalator from which there is
no other exit except by physical demise or a revolution. The
regime he is heading is presenting the West with an unprecedented
challenge: a highly personalistic authoritarianism, which is
resurgent, activist, inspired by a mission, prone to risky
behavior both for ideological reasons and those of domestic
political legitimacy, and armed, by the latest count, with 1,735
strategic nuclear warheads on 521 delivery platforms.

Does this mean that the United States cannot cooperate with
Putin`s Russia Of course it does not so long as the U.S. does not
waste time and effort in areas where the gap in ultimate goals
between Washington and Moscow is too wide to be bridged. For
instance, in Syria, the West wants peace. Putin needs victory.
And the victory will likely look like this: The secular, pro-
Western opposition is either decimated or forced to disarm as
part of the US-Russian ``peace process.`` The Bashar al-Assad
regime is saved. The West is confronted with the repugnant choice
between Assad, on the one hand, and a combination of ISIS and the
al Qaeda affiliate Jabhat al Nusra on the other. Russia, in the
meantime, will have been restored to the Soviet Union`s position
as an indispensable international player and the key outside
actor in the Middle East. This certainly would not serve American
interests.

Yet, there is one area where the coincidence in goals is not just
possible but vital to the interests of the United States. Today,
Russia finds itself under siege. Not by the West, of course,
despite what the state propaganda machine asserts on national
television daily. It is under siege from what I called the
Russian Jihad when testifying a few months ago before Mr.
Rohrabacher`s subcommittee.

I will be happy to go into more details later in this session.
Now, let me mention just a few facts:

-- Russia has had more prisoners (9) in Guantanamo than any
European nation except for Britain, which also has had 9.7

-- The first and thus far only Taliban commander ever to be tried
in a US federal court was a Russian national. Found guilty, he
was sentenced on December 3 of last year to life in prison plus
30 years.8

-- Russia is surpassed only by Tunisia and Saudi Arabia in the
number of its nationals fighting with ISIS (2,400).9

-- Russian-speaking jihadists, from Russia and the former Soviet
Union, make up the second largest group of foreigners fighting
with ISIS after Arabic speakers10 (between 5,000-7,00011).
Russian language graffiti has been spotted in Darayya, Syria
(``We will pray in your palace, Putin!`` and ``Tatars and
Chechens, rise up!``12), and there is even an Univermag grocery
store in the ``Russian`` district of ISIS`s de facto capital of
Raqqa, alongside Russian-language schools and kindergartens.13

We can`t be of much help to Moscow as it struggles to contain the
spread of militant Islamism inside Russia. But we can and should
cooperate with Moscow in Central Asia, Russia`s soft underbelly,
to paraphrase Churchill. Next to Afghanistan, Central Asia is
likely more vulnerable to the Taliban and ISIS than any other
region of the world. The spread of Islamism in Central Asia would
bring the Taliban and ISIS virtually to Russia`s borders not to
mention the hundreds of thousands of Central Asian refugees
fleeing to Russia from the Taliban and ISIS if the Central Asian
states begin to fall like dominos.

Yes, it is Russia`s problem. But it will be Washington`s problem
as well if an area with a population of 68 million people becomes
another terrorist heaven and a magnet for would-be world
jihadists.

Again, I`ll be happy to discuss the signs and causes of the
Central Asian peril as well as how Russia and the United States
can work together there. Let me state only that there is a
hopeful track record of USRussian cooperation in trying to
stabilize Afghanistan. That experience may be able to inform a
joint effort to defend Central Asia from subversion and
ultimately a takeover by militant fundamentalism.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.