Body




Statement of Simon Johnson
Ronald Kurtz Professor of Entrepreneurship
MIT Sloan School of Management

Committee on House Financial Services
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

July 8, 2015

A. Main Points

1) Section 165 of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act authorizes the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System to establish ``more
stringent`` standards and requirements for bank holding companies
with assets over $50 billion compared with smaller bank holding
companies. At the same time, the Fed is granted considerable
discretion to determine exactly how to apply these standards,
including what requirements are imposed on different size banks
(Section 165(a)(2)(A)). (The precise wording of the Act is
discussed further in Section C below.)

2) As a matter of practice since 2010, the Fed has not applied
one set of standards to all banks with assets over $50 billion.
There is substantial differentiation, depending in part on size,
but also varying according to factors such business model,
complexity, and opaqueness.

3) This differentiation, to date, seems sensible and reasonably
robust - subject to the points below. It also appears completely
consistent with Congressional intent, expressed through Dodd-
Frank and earlier legislation that is still in effect.

4) The Federal Reserve has long had responsibility for the safety
and soundness of the American financial system. This role can be
traced back to the panic of 1907, which led to the founding of
the Fed in 1913. The bank runs and broader economic problems of
the 1930s led to a re-founding of the Federal Reserve System,
with a clear mandate to prevent the financial system from getting
out of control.2

5) In the run-up to 2007-08, the Federal Reserve had a great deal
of discretion with regard to financial regulation and supervision
but failed: to protect consumers, to understand the buildup of
risk around derivatives, to supervise appropriately some large
financial institutions then under its jurisdiction, and to keep
the system from imploding. 3 These failures were not due to lack
of resources or an unawareness of the changes happening within
the financial system. Rather there was a deliberate strategy of
noninterference, along with many instances of actually
encouraging various forms of deregulation that, in retrospect,
are clearly understood - including by Fed staff and governors -
as having increased levels of systemic risk.4

6) At the time of the discussions and debates that led to Dodd-
Frank, Congress had to face the facts: almost all the banking and
financial sector regulators had failed in their tasks - some even
more spectacularly than had the Fed. (The exception was the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, but a decision was taken
not to promote the FDIC to the role of system regulator.)

7) With regard to bank holding companies, Congress did not create
a new authority for the Fed in Dodd-Frank. Rather Congress re-
affirmed the existing broad authority and set some minimum bars -
specifying bright lines to define for the Fed which kinds of bank
holding companies require more attention, while allowing the Fed
to retain a considerable degree of discretion regarding what
exactly that attention will involve.5

8) At the threshold of $50 billion in total assets, bank holding
companies are now required to prepare resolution plans. They must
also file an integrated Systemic Risk Report (FR Y-15).

9) Bank holding companies with more than $10 billion in total
assets must conduct annual company-run stress tests. Bank holding
companies with more than $50 billion in total assets must conduct
semiannual company run stress tests and also participate in
stress tests run by the Federal Reserve.6

10) The Fed already had authority to establish regulatory capital
requirements, liquidity standards, risk-management standards, and
concentration limits (including singlecounterparty credit
limits). All of these can be and have been tailored as the Fed
deems appropriate.7

11) There are, of course, costs with running any sensible risk
management program. Many of these so-called ``compliance costs``
are very much in the interests of shareholders - it was
deficiencies in or the complete lack of such programs that
resulted in heavy losses and significant financial firm failures
in the crisis. For example, the Dodd-Frank requirement (Section
165(h)) of risk committees for bank holding companies with more
than $10 billion in assets seems entirely consistent with the
best interests of shareholders.

12) Shareholders could, in principle, speak for themselves
regarding how much risk management they want and how they would
like this to be organized. But we must recognize the limits
imposed on shareholder influence over bank holding company
management, including through the extensive rules on ownership of
banks. These restrictions are, ironically, administered by the
Federal Reserve itself.8

13) Some recent legislative proposals could increase our
deference to the Financial Stability Board (FSB), with regard to
either criteria or actual designation of banks (or nonbanks) as
systemically important. This would be unwise. The FSB plays an
important role in facilitating communication between regulators,
but not all major countries share our concern for or general
approach to limiting systemic risk. Relying too much on the FSB
would excessively cede US sovereignty to a body with limited
accountability. It could also create the possibility of a ``race
to the bottom``, as happened with capital requirements before
2007.

14) Other proposals suggest that the Financial Stability
Oversight Council (FSOC) should have to designate banks as
systemic in order for them to receive heightened scrutiny from
the Fed. This would be a strange arrangement, as FSOC by design
includes nonbank regulators, such as the chairs of the Securities
and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission. Allowing or requiring nonbank regulators to tell a
bank regulator which banks to regulate (and potentially how to
regulate them) does not seem wise.

15) It would be helpful to require bank holding companies with at
least $10 billion in total assets to file a Systemic Risk Report
(FR Y-15). This report is concise and provides data on the
systemic footprint of a financial institution. Hopefully, bank
holding companies put together such data for their own management
and investors in any case. Publishing such reports provides a
clearer perspective, for regulators and for market participants,
on differences in activities and risks across bank holding
companies just below and just above $50 billion in assets.

16) Should some bank holding companies with less than $50 billion
in total assets be subject to heightened scrutiny, for example
due to various off-balance sheet activities, such as derivatives?
Without seeing Systemic Risk Reports for those firms, it is hard
to know.

17) The available Systemic Risk Reports also suggest that, at all
size levels, it would be sensible to think of bank holding
company size more in terms of total exposure (on-balance sheet
plus off-balance sheet) as defined in those reports, rather than
the more narrow measure of total consolidated assets. (More on
this in Section B below.)

B. The Critical Threshold Issue

What if the threshold for enhanced prudential standards were
lifted, for example, to $100 billion? At the end of 2014, there
were 9 bank holding companies that had consolidated assets
between $50 billion and $100 billion: Deutsche Bank Trust
Corporation ($56 billion), Zions Bancorporation ($57 billion),
Huntington Bancshares Incorporated ($66 billion), Comerica
Incorporated ($70 billion), Discover Financial Services ($83
billion), BBVA Compass Bancshares ($83 billion), Bancwest
Corporation ($90 billion), KeyCorp ($94 billion), M&T Bank
Corporation ($97 billion).9 However, a better measure of
potential significance in the financial system as a whole is
``total exposures`` of a bank holding company, as defined in the
Banking Organization Systemic Risk Report form (FR Y-15, Schedule
A, line 4).10 This requires a bank to report both its on-balance
sheet and off-balance sheet activities, including derivatives
exposures and credit card commitments, in a comparable way.11 As
we learned in 2007 and 2008, off-balance sheet activities are
important and can - particularly at a time of stress - have major
impact on solvency of financial institutions and on the spillover
effects from potential failures.

In the latest available Systemic Risk Reports, from the end of
2014, six of these 9 bank holding companies actually had ``total
exposure`` (on- and off-balance sheet) over $100 billion.12 It is
hard to argue that the fate of a bank holding company with a
total exposure threshold of over $100 billion is definitely
inconsequential to the system as a whole.13

Of the three bank holding companies that had under $100 billion
in total exposure, one is a subsidiary of a large non-US bank
that recently failed the stress tests conducted by the Fed.14 It
would seem unwise to suddenly regard those firms as no longer
needing more stringent standards than required for smaller and
much simpler banks. This leaves Huntington Bancshares
Incorporated and Zions Bancorporation below $100 billion in total
exposure.15

While some regional banks have relatively simple business models,
others are at least partially more complex. For example, five of
the 9 bank holding companies with under $100 billion in total
assets are (i.e., own) registered swaps dealers or have a
significant exposure to derivatives.16 Regional banks, including
those in the $50 billion to $100 billion total asset range, were
reportedly involved in lobbying for the repeal of Section 716 of
Dodd-Frank, which would have ``pushed out`` some swaps from their
insured bank subsidiaries. The repeal of Section 716 at the end
of 2014 is a further reason for the Fed and other regulators to
pay close attention to regional banks.

If the discussion turns to considering lifting the scrutiny and
reporting requirements for banks having over $100 billion in
total assets, then looking at total exposures remains important.
In the Systemic Risk Reports for the end of 2013, all of the bank
holding companies with over $100 billion in assets actually had
total exposure of at least $140 billion.17

C. Regulatory Interpretation of Dodd-Frank

Some recent prominent discussion of the Dodd-Frank Act suggests
that bank holding companies with over $50 billion are
``designated`` as ``systemic``. But this is not what the
legislation actually says and this is not how the law has been
interpreted by regulators.

Section 165(a)(1) of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act reads,

``In order to prevent or mitigate risks to the financial
stability of the United States that could arise from the material
financial distress or failure, or ongoing activities, of large,
interconnected financial institutions, the Board of Governors
shall, on its own or pursuant to recommendations by the Council
under section 115, establish prudential standards for nonbank
financial companies supervised by the Board of Governors and bank
holding companies with total consolidated assets equal to or
greater than $50,000,000,000 that

(A) are more stringent than the standards and requirements
applicable to nonbank financial companies and bank holding
companies that do not present similar risks to the financial
stability of the United States; and

(B) increase in stringency, based on the considerations
identified in subsection (b)(3).`` Section 165(a)(2) stipulates
that the Board of Governors may ``differentiate among companies
on an individual basis or by category, taking into consideration
their capital structure, riskiness, complexity, financial
activities (including the financial activities of their
subsidiaries), size, and any other risk-related factors that the
Board of Governors deems appropriate.`` And the threshold for
applying some standards may be set above $50 billion.

The Federal Reserve appears to have interpreted this and related
sections of Dodd-Frank exactly as intended, i.e., as requiring
additional scrutiny for bank holding companies over $50 billion,
compared with smaller bank holding companies, but not as
requiring that all bank holding companies over $50 billion be
treated the same way.18

Martin J. Gruenberg, chairman of the FDIC, confirms that this is
how regulators have interpreted the law.19

``In implementing the requirement for resolution plans, the FDIC
and the Federal Reserve instituted a staggered schedule for plan
submissions to reflect differing risk profiles``.

And,

``The FDIC`s stress testing rules, like those of other agencies,
are tailored to the size of the institutions consistent with the
expectations under section 165 for progressive application of the
requirements.``

Overall, the Dodd-Frank financial reforms told the Fed to be more
careful in its regulation of bank holding companies with more
than $50 billion in total assets, but there was definitely no one-
size-fits-all requirement. The Fed and other regulators seem to
have followed both the letter and spirit of this instruction.