Body

Statement of Douglas Holtz-Eakin
President
American Action Forum

Committee on Senate Judiciary

March 16, 2016

Introduction

Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Leahy and members of the
Committee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to appear today.
In this testimony, I wish to make four basic points:

- The federal budget outlook is quite dire, harms economic
growth, and ultimately raises the real threat of a sovereign debt
crisis,

- The adoption of a ``fiscal rule`` would be a valuable step
toward budgetary practice that would address this threat and
preclude its recurrence,

- A balanced budget amendment to the U.S. Constitution is one
such fiscal rule; one whose very nature would render it an
effective fiscal constraint immune from the forces that have
generated a history of Congresses reneging on budgetary targets,
and

- Recent incarnations of a balanced budget amendment contain
provisions that address some traditional concerns regarding
balanced budget requirements.

I will pursue each in additional detail.

The Budgetary Threat

The federal government faces enormous budgetary difficulties,
largely due to long-term pension, health, and other spending
promises coupled with recent programmatic expansions. The core,
long-term issue has been outlined in successive versions of the
Congressional Budget Office`s (CBO`s) Long-Term Budget Outlook1.
In broad terms, the inexorable dynamics of current law will raise
federal outlays from an historic norm of about 20 percent of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to anywhere from 30 to nearly 40
percent of GDP. Spending at this level will far outstrip revenue,
even with receipts projected to exceed historic norms, and
generate an unmanageable federal debt spiral.

This depiction of the federal budgetary future and its diagnosis
and prescription has all remained unchanged for at least a
decade. Despite this, meaningful action (in the right direction)
has yet to be seen, as the most recent budgetary projections
demonstrate. In January, the Congressional Budget Office released
its updated budget and economic baseline for 2016-2026. The basic
picture from CBO is as follows: tax revenues return to pre-
recession norms, while spending progressively grows over and
above currently elevated numbers. The net effect is an upward
debt trajectory on top of an already large debt portfolio. The
CBO succinctly articulates the risk this poses: ``Such high and
rising debt would have serious negative consequences for the
budget and the nation. . . Such high and rising debt relative to
the size of the economy would dampen economic growth and thus
reduce people`s incomes compared with what otherwise would be the
case. It would also increasingly restrict policymakers` ability
to use tax and spending policies to respond to unexpected
challenges, and it would boost the risk of a fiscal crisis in
which the government would lose its ability to borrow at
affordable rates.``

According to the CBO, tax revenue will remain above 18 percent of
GDP over the next ten years. This is well above the 40-year
average of 17.4 percent. The federal government is projected to
spend over $51 trillion over ten years, maintaining spending
levels 1.6 percentage points above historical levels. Mandatory
spending, which comprised 46 percent of the federal budget in
1976, will reach 65 percent in 2026. Interest payments on the
debt comprised 7 percent of the budget in 1976 and 6 percent in
2015. These payments will more than double to 13 percent of the
budget. Debt service payments will reach 3 percent of GDP by 2026
- well in excess of the 40-year average of 2.1 percent.

Over 2017-2026, projected deficits will surpass $1 trillion again
by 2022. Importantly, the deficit outlook has worsened since
CBO`s last estimate by over $1.5 trillion. While about $750
billion of this projected increase is attributable to
legislation, the balance of this more pessimistic projection is
due to weaker projected growth and technical assumptions.

The trajectory, direction and the magnitude of the current debt
outstanding is ultimately the most telling characteristic of the
U.S. fiscal path. The widely acknowledged drivers of the long-
term debt, health, and retirement programs for aging populations,
and borrowing costs, will begin to overtake higher than average
tax revenue and steady economic growth by the middle of the
decade, and grow ever inexorably upwards until creditors
effectively refuse to continue to finance our deficits by
charging ever higher interest payments on an increasingly large
debt portfolio.

This crisis state is more pernicious than mere stabilization of
the debt at a high level, which would suppress economic growth as
financing the debt crowds out other productive investment.
Rather, unchecked accumulation of debt would precipitate a fiscal
crisis that would upend world financial markets and do lasting
harm to the nation`s standard of living. The growing risk that
the United States could face such a fiscal crisis requires the
serious consideration of a fiscal rule, namely a balanced budget
amendment, to forestall the deleterious economic consequences
that attend to sovereign debt crises.

The Value of Fiscal Rules

At present, the federal government does not have a fiscal
``policy.`` Instead, it has fiscal ``outcomes``. The House and
Senate do not always agree on a budget resolution. Annual
appropriations reflect the contemporaneous politics of conference
committee compromise, and White House negotiation. Often, the
annual appropriations process is, in whole or in part, replaced
with a continuing resolution. Annual discretionary spending is
not coordinated in any way with the outlays from mandatory
spending programs operating on autopilot. And nothing annually
constrains overall spending to have any relationship to the fees
and tax receipts flowing into the U.S. Treasury. The fiscal
outcome is whatever it turns out to be - usually bad - and
certainly not a policy choice.

I believe that it would be tremendously valuable for the federal
government to adopt a fiscal rule. Such a rule could take the
form of an overall cap on federal spending (perhaps as a share of
GDP), a limit on the ratio of federal debt in the hands of the
public relative to GDP, a balanced budget requirement, or many
others. Committing to a fiscal rule would force the current,
disjointed appropriations, mandatory spending, and tax decisions
to fit coherently within the adopted fiscal rule. Accordingly, it
would force lawmakers to make tough tradeoffs, especially across
categories of spending.

Most importantly, it would give Congress a way to say ``no.``
Spending proposals would not simply have to be good ideas. They
would have to be good enough to merit cutting other spending
programs or using taxes to dragoon resources from the private
sector. Congress would more easily be able to say, ``not good
enough, sorry.``

What should one look for in picking a fiscal rule? First, it
should work; that is, it should help solve the problem of a
threatening debt. A fiscal rule like PAYGO at best stops further
deterioration of the fiscal outlook and does not help to solve
the problem. Second, it is important that there be a direct link
between policymaker actions and the fiscal rule outcome.

Finally, the fiscal rule should be transparent so that the public
and policymakers alike have a clear understanding of how it
works. This is a strike against a rule like the ratio of debt-to-
GDP. The public has only the weakest grip on the concept of
federal debt in the hands of the public, certainly does not
understand how GDP is produced and measured, and (God help us)
may not be able to divide. Without transparency and
understanding, public support for the fiscal rule will be too
weak for it to survive. As documented by the Pew-Peterson
Commission on Budget Reform other countries have benefitted from
adopting fiscal rules. The Dutch government established separate
caps on expenditures for health care, social security and the
labor market. There are also sub-caps within the core sectors.

Sweden reacted to a recession and fiscal crisis by adopting an
expenditure ceiling and a target for the overall government
surplus (averaged over the business cycle). Later (in 2000) a
balanced budget requirement was introduced for local governments.
Finally, in 2003 the public supported a constitutional amendment
to limit annual federal government spending to avoid perennial
deficits.

A lesson is that, no matter which rule is adopted, it will rise
or fall based on political will to use it and the public's
support for its consequences.

A Balanced Budget Amendment

How should one think of proposals to amend the Constitution of
the United States to require a balanced federal budget? It would
clearly be quite significant. Despite the good intentions of the
Budget Control Act of 2011, there is little indication that the
resultant savings will do anything but delay the fiscal threats
outlined above. Absent significant fiscal reform, these
challenges will continue to evolve from pressing to irreversible.
The distinguishing characteristics of a Constitutional amendment
to address these challenges make it a far more robust tool in
this endeavor.

First, fiscal constraints, in the form of spending caps,
triggers, and other like devices are laudable, but fall short of
Constitutional amendment in their efficacy as a fiscal rule
similar to those pursued by nations such as the Netherlands and
Sweden.

A Constitutional amendment, by design, is (effectively)
permanent, and therefore persistent, even if bypassed in certain
exigent circumstances, in its effect on U.S. fiscal policy.
Fiscal rules should allow policy figures to say ``no.`` A
Constitutional amendment will not only allow that, but given the
gravity inherent in a Constitutional amendment, hopefully
dissuade contemplation of legislative end-arounds that other rule
might invite.

Second, there is a clear link between Congressional actions -
cutting spending, raising taxes - and the adherence to a balanced
budget amendment. Of course, Congressional action is not all that
determines annual expenditures and receipts.

Military conflicts and other such contingencies can incur costs
without advance Congressional action, while economic conditions
can affect spending, such as with unemployment insurance and
other assistance programs, and tax revenues. However, these
fluctuations are ultimately not the driving force between the
U.S. fiscal imbalance.

Indeed, in a world with stable tax revenue and without the need
for military contingencies, the U S. would still be headed
towards fiscal crisis. Rather, enacted spending and tax policy
largely set forth the U S. fiscal path that must be altered to
avert a fiscal crisis. A meaningful constraint on these factors
would confront policymakers with the necessity to alter those
polices, and as discussed above, to make the choices and
tradeoffs needed to shore up the nation's finances. Tying those
choices to an immutable standard, in the form of a Constitutional
amendment, would facilitate that process.

A third facet of a Constitutional amendment that augurs well for
its efficacy is the ratification process itself. This is a
process that takes years. Successful ratification of a
Constitutional amendment requires acceptance at many levels of
public engagement. For the purpose of constraining federal
finances, this is beneficial, as it necessarily requires public
``buy-in.`` Without question, the changes needed to address
federal spending policy will be difficult. Any process that
engages the public, and by necessity, requires public complicity
to be successful will ease the process of enacting otherwise
difficult fiscal changes.

Lastly, the very nature of a Constitutional amendment shields it
from the annual, or perhaps more frequent, vicissitudes of
federal policymaking. It cannot be revised, modified, or
otherwise ignored in the fashion of the many checks on fiscal
policy enacted or attributable to the Congressional Budget Act of
1974 or its successors. Congress cannot renege on its obligations
with such an amendment in place. While unquestionably a
constraint on Congress, as a parameter of federal policymaking it
would be one by which all must abide.

Auxiliary Features of a Balanced Budget Proposal

As noted above, a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution
has several unique characteristics that distinguish it as an
effective fiscal rule. However, not all balanced budget
amendments are created equal. Balanced budget amendments can
differ significantly, with considerable variation in the
consequence of their design.

While largely the result of choices by policymakers, the U.S.
fiscal situation is, and will be in the future, shaped in some
way by forces outside of the legislative process, such as war,
calamity, of economic distress. Critical to an effective balanced
budget amendment is the acknowledgment of this reality with a
mechanism for adjusting to these forces without undermining the
goal of the amendment to constrain fiscal policy. The abuse of
emergency designations in legislation to get around budget
enforcement is an example of what can happen when the goal of
constraining fiscal policy is subordinated to flexibility in the
face of some crisis, real or otherwise. Stringent accountability,
such as the requirement of supermajority, affirmative votes can
mitigate this problem.

Past iterations of balanced budget amendments have legitimately
raised questions as to their capacity to limit the scale of the
federal government. There is nothing inherent in a balanced
budget amendment to limit federal spending beyond the belief that
at some point, the tax burden necessary to balance the
expenditure of a large federal government ultimately reaches an
intolerable level. But there is nothing about a balanced budget
amendment alone that precludes reaching tax and spending levels
just approaching that tipping point, which is far from desirable
policy. Accordingly, recent examples of balanced budget
amendments seek to staunch the accumulation of debt, which is
ensured by balance, while also limiting the spending to the
historical revenue norm. Likewise, recent examples of balanced
budget amendments that limit the Congress's ability to raise
taxes. In each case these limitations can be waived by
supermajority votes. These are sound approaches that address
concerns that a requirement to be in balance will add tax policy
to the share of fiscal policy already on autopilot.

The last issue of concern, but with a less obvious remedy relates
to enforcement. It is not obvious in any of the extant amendments
what would occur if the requirements of the amendment were
violated. The enforcement mechanism for these requirements
arguably may not exist, and may not exist until tested after the
ratification of a balanced budget amendment. The various waivers
provide Congressional allowances for specific overages as a means
of establishing compliance should U.S. finances fail to balance
or exceed certain limits assuming one of the proposed amendments
is successfully ratified.

The provision in the prevailing Senate balanced budget amendment
prohibiting courts from raising revenues in the event of a
``breach`` entertains the possibility that the U.S. may indeed
find itself in an ex post violation of a balanced budget
amendment. That suggests that irrespective of the waiver
provisions, there is nothing within the amendment itself that
addresses enforcement, whether by sequestration or some other
means. While many criticisms of past approaches to balanced
budget amendments have been meaningfully addressed in recent
efforts, the question of enforcement remains a challenge that
should be thoughtfully considered.

Thank you for the opportunity to appear today. I look forward to
answering any questions the Committee may have.
