Body




Statement of Philip G. Joyce
Professor, Public Policy and Senior Associate Dean
University of Maryland, School of Public Policy

Committee on Senate Budget

April 20, 2016

Chairman Enzi and members of the Committee:

Thank you for asking me to testify today on this important topic.
I congratulate this committee for deciding to highlight the
subject of the apparently invisible, yet insidious, effects that
budget uncertainty creates for both federal agencies and the
recipients of government funds. My comments today are informed by
my own 30 years of observing the federal budget process, and some
recent research that I have done culminating in a report written
in 2012 for the IBM Center on the Business of Government.1 No one
paying even casual attention to the routine dysfunction of the
federal budget process in recent years-from ``fiscal cliffs`` to
sequestration to government shutdowns and threats of shutdowns--
could avoid coming away with the impression that the federal
budget process is not working well. It would be somewhat
reassuring to think that this recent experience was exceptional,
and that we could now return to normal. Unfortunately, however,
it is just the latest example of a system where we limp along
from one crisis and missed deadline to another.

While actual government shutdowns are rare, ``government by
continuing resolution`` is now the normal way of doing business,
creating costs and problems of its own. The insidious effects of
the chronic uncertainty that routine CRs create for federal
agencies and recipients of government funds are at least as
worthy of attention, and may indeed be more damaging, than the
more high profile instances of sequestration or brief government
shutdowns. Some of these costs are financial, and some represent
inefficiencies and compromised effectiveness for federal
programs. All of these negative impacts are self-inflicted,
however, and are entirely preventable.

In my testimony today, I will do four things:

-- Review the practice of late appropriations and other actions
that create uncertainty in the federal budget process;

-- Discuss the specific costs and effects of this dysfunction on
federal agencies;

-- Describe some of the effects of uncertainty that trickle down
to recipients of government funds; and

-- Offer suggestions as to how these costs and effects might be
reduced in order to promote more efficiency and effectiveness in
government programs and agencies.

Shutdowns and Continuing Resolutions Past Experience

The 1974 Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act, which
created the modern congressional budget process, moved the start
of the federal fiscal year from July 1 to October 1. This
occurred in part to accommodate the additional steps created by
the 1974 Budget Act, and in part because the Congress had a
difficult time enacting appropriations prior to the start of the
fiscal year. Ironically, however, the appropriations process has
not gotten more timely since the 1974 Act. In fact, in only 4 of
the 40 fiscal years since 1977 (the first year under the new
process) have all appropriations bills been passed and signed
into law prior to the start of the fiscal year.

In the first years following the advent of the new process, there
were limited consequences of late appropriations, because
agencies continued to operate normally even in the absence of
funding. Agencies assumed that the Congress intended for them to
continue operating, and that the required funding would be
forthcoming. This changed in 1980 when Attorney General Benjamin
Civiletti issued an opinion stating that agencies did not have
legal authority to spend money in absence of appropriations.
After the Civiletti opinion, continuing resolutions became the
norm, since they were necessary (in the absence of
appropriations) in order for agencies to continue to operate.
Short funding gaps were relatively routine, but many of these
occurred over holiday weekends and the impacts were not widely
felt. Between fiscal year 1982 and fiscal year 1988, there were
nine such funding gaps (sometimes two in a single year) but their
average duration was two days. While technically these might have
been government shutdowns, they had a very small impact.

The fiscal year 1996 budget process, however, yielded the longest
government shutdowns in history, totaling 26 days. The first
lasted from November 14th to November 19th, 1995, and resulted in
the furlough of 800,000 federal employees in agencies covered by
appropriation bills that had not been enacted. A second, much
longer, shutdown commenced on December 16th, 1995, and lasted for
three weeks until January 6, 1996. This second shutdown only
furloughed 284,000 federal employees; the number was reduced
mainly because several more appropriation bills had been enacted
in the interim. While a thorough discussion of this shutdown is
beyond the scope of this hearing, later studies estimated a
financial cost of $1.4 billion (mostly resulting from paying
employees retroactively for work that was not done), in addition
to substantial negative effects on service delivery. For example,
almost 400 National Park Service facilities were closed,
affecting 7 million visitors. Further, the Social Security
Administration did not process about 200,000 applications for
benefits, and 800,000 toll-free calls went unanswered. More
recently, the fiscal year 2014 budget process resulted in a
government shutdown that commenced on the first day of the fiscal
year (October 1, 2013), and lasted for 16 days. An analysis by
the Office of Management and Budget estimated a number of costs
associated with this shutdown. They included a loss of $2 billion
to $6 billion in domestic economic output, and another $2 billion
in costs associated with paying federal employees retroactively
for work that was not done.2

While there were no shutdowns between the fiscal year 1996
shutdown and the one affecting fiscal year 2014, and no shutdowns
for fiscal year 2015 or fiscal year 2016, this does not mean that
the appropriations process has operated smoothly in the absence
of a shutdown. In fact, we have experienced government by
continuing resolution every year since 1997; increasingly there
have been more of these per year, and they have extended further
in to the fiscal year. For the 19 fiscal years between 1998 and
2016, there were an average of almost 6 CRs per year (the high
point was fiscal year 2001, when there were 21) and CRs, on
average, covered an average of 3 months (excluding the three
years 2007, 2011, and 2013--in which there were full-year CRs). 3

Effects of Budget Uncertainty and Crisis Budgeting on Federal
Agencies

The failure to enact timely appropriations creates an environment
of substantial uncertainty for federal agencies and for
recipients of federal funds. The focus by the public and the news
media tends not to be on this routine dysfunction and the
problems that it creates, but on the immediate crisis: How do we
avoid going over the fiscal ``cliff``?; How do we avoid a
government shutdown?; How do we prevent a debt default? The
effects of funding delays caused by routine CRs, however, are
significant. Budgeting is about planning for the future. Any
organization whether it is the federal government, a state or
local government, or a business needs to have some notion of the
funds that it will have available in order to effectively budget,
and manage. The more certainty that exists, the better informed
the decisions are, and the more effective the result. For the
federal government, late appropriations and ``government by CR``
have created a number of specific problems:

-- CRs have various effects on government personnel, including
hiring freezes that create skill gaps in crucial areas, and
morale and turnover problems, often as a direct result of
employees feeling as if they are pawns in a larger political game
over which they have no control.

-- Because CRs require the continuation of current activities,
agencies have trouble responding to many new problems and are
required to keep funding outdated or ineffective programs.

-- CRs may require agencies to engage in short-term contracting,
which significantly increases contracting workload and overhead
costs. In addition, delays in contracting can lead to higher
costs for individual contracts and also higher costs resulting
from less competition.

-- Investments that are not made in people (as training is
cancelled or deferred) or infrastructure (in the form of deferred
maintenance) lead to higher future costs.

-- Agencies waste a great deal of time preparing for potential
government shutdowns and CRs, and then complying with them after
the fact.

Delayed Hiring and Personnel Actions, and Morale Issues. Because
personnel costs are such a substantial portion of many agency
budgets, managing delays in funding necessitates reducing
personnel spending.

This often leads to hiring freezes or across-the-board cuts.
Hiring freezes can create skill gaps in parts of the agency where
turnover is greatest. This means that a hiring freeze can end up
robbing the agency of personnel working in higher priority
programs, or can have an unintentional differential effect if
vacancies are concentrated in particular programs, projects, or
activities.

In cases where funding delays lead to concerns that a shutdown or
sudden budget reduction may follow (as occurred in 2011 and 2013)
agencies may be required to prepare furlough plans and to send
out furlough notices to employees. This can have unintended
consequences, even in cases where the furloughs are unlikely to
actually take effect. Some employees may respond to furlough
notices by spending otherwise productive time seeking other
employment. Those who end up leaving (because of fear of
furlough, or because they are just fed up) are likely to be those
who were just hired or who have other options. In either case,
they are not necessarily the ones that an agency would choose to
terminate if the agency was focused on performance
considerations.

Freezing Priorities in Place. Continuing resolutions also create
problems in cases where agencies are attempting to shift
priorities to respond to some immediate challenge facing them. If
an agency has identified a need to shift personnel from one area
to another, to address some area of immediate concern, this can
delay its ability to respond. This is complicated further by the
sheer amount of time that it can take to fill a position. A
position that is approved in February or March might not be
filled until August or September.

A 2009 GAO report on the effect of CRs cited numerous examples of
this behavior.4 For example, the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) delayed filling existing positions in order to fund annual
pay raises, annualize pay for previous year`s hiring, or to cover
increased costs of retirement, health insurance, or other
employee benefits. GAO found other examples where hiring delays
affected the number of FDA food inspections, the ability to
maintain or improve the ratio of corrections officers to inmates,
and the ability to process claims for veterans` benefits.

The fiscal year 2011 budget delays, leading up to a final
agreement that was not reached until April 2011, is illustrative
of the compromises to government effectiveness that can occur.
Media reports indicated that DOD needed to raid procurement
budgets in the first half of the year in order to fund pay and
benefits, resulting in deployed troops not getting needed
equipment, the cancellation of 20 ship overhauls by the Navy, and
deferred aircraft maintenance. There were nondefense effects as
well. In State College, Pennsylvania, a newly built $7.5 million
air traffic control tower, sat empty in the spring of 2011
because the Federal Aviation Administration lacked the funding to
hire the air traffic controllers to staff it. In addition to
preventing new starts, CRs typically require activities that are
ongoing to be continued. In other words, in addition to
prohibiting agencies from doing NEW things, CRs also prohibit
them from ceasing funding for OLD things. In one case the
Department of Justice had decided to stop funding the National
Drug Intelligence Center in Johnstown, Pennsylvania. Since they
could not plan for a specific date to cease operations, the
passage of a CR required them to continue operating until the
regular appropriation became law.

Changes in Contracting Practices. Because late appropriations
have become the ``new normal`` for agencies, they have adjusted
their spending patterns to accommodate. The agencies interviewed
by GAO in 2009 each reported that they delayed contracts. The
Veterans Health Administration (VHA) said that they did not start
nonrecurring maintenance projects, but instead waited until the
regular appropriation was received. Delays can also lead to a
rush to obligate at the end of the year. VHA reported to GAO, for
example, that in 2006 they obligated 60 percent (about $248
million) of a $424 million nonrecurring maintenance budget in
September, the last month of the fiscal year. This rush creates a
greater potential to make mistakes, which may lead to wasted
funds and adverse audit findings.

In addition to delaying contracts, many agencies also are forced
to enter into multiple contracts for a much shorter time period
(instead of one yearly contract), so that the duration of the
contract can more-orless match the duration of the CR. For
example, BOP awarded a contract in 1997 to an optometrist to
provide care for a prison. Under a regular appropriation, this
would have been a one-year contract. Instead, there were three
contracts covering only the first quarter of the year: 1) October
1 to November 16; 2) November 19 to December 14; and 3) December
17 to December 21. This kind of short-term contracting creates
substantial additional workload more contracts means more work,
higher administrative costs, and greater opportunity for errors
and waste.

These changes in contracting practices often lead to increases in
costs. The Bureau of Prisons (BOP) reported to GAO that a CR
lasting longer than 3 to 4 months typically negatively affects
the quality of competition. In addition, delayed contracts may
have higher prices. BOP said that awarding contracts later
prevented the agency from locking in prices and therefore
increased costs. In one case (the McDowell Prison facility in
West Virginia), this resulted in about $5.4 million in additional
costs. The precision of this estimate is exceptional; most
agencies know that costs are higher, but are unable to confirm
specific dollar amounts of increased costs.

Along these same lines, it seems quite likely that many
contractors dealing with the federal government include a ``risk
premium`` in the rate that they charge for contractual services,
because they cannot negotiate reliable multi-year commitments
without fear of funding interruption. Federal agencies pay more
for services than an equivalent private firm would pay for the
same service. While the existence of such a premium is widely
assumed, it is difficult, if not impossible, to estimate it with
any precision.

Failing to Invest in Training, Travel and Maintenance. Travel and
training, as areas where agencies typically have discretion to
delay funding, are frequent candidates for cutbacks. One agency
representative reported that the agency simply avoided sending
staff to training in the first quarter of the calendar year. The
later that the final appropriation is received, the more that
training budgets (and therefore training) is likely to be
reduced. In DOD, for example, training and the agency`s key
challenge of maintaining force readiness are inexorably related.
The various forms of budget uncertainty (the threatened
government shutdown, and the debt ceiling impasse) led, in some
years, to measurable reductions in DOD training. The Air Force,
for example, predicted that CRs and planning for a shutdown in
2011 reduced flying hours by ten percent, and other active duty
personnel interviewed in 2011 reported that the near shutdown led
to the cancellation of training exercises.

Foregone maintenance also increases costs. There is little
question that failing to properly maintain any asset reduces its
useful life. This can have two possible impacts. It could simply
take the asset in question out of service, thus depriving
citizens of the benefits that would otherwise be received.
Perhaps more likely, it will lead to future costs as the asset
wears out more quickly. A very clear example of this potential
comes from the 2011 funding delay, when the Navy cancelled seven
ship-repair contracts, at a savings of $62 million (McCabe,
2011). Even if these repairs occurred in a later fiscal year,
their deferral could clearly have operational and cost
implications.

Wasted Time and Effort, Leading to Reduced Effectiveness and
Efficiency. Aside from increasing costs, continuing resolutions
and funding delays invariably created additional work and cause
agencies to take actions that compromise their efficiency and
effectiveness.

A good place to start here is with the process of preparing for
shutdowns, and for living with CRs. Staff in federal agencies,
OMB, and the Congress spend a non-trivial amount of time
preparing for things that usually do not happen (in the case of
shutdowns) or which do happen, but which waste a lot of time in
trying to lessen counterproductive or even illegal effects (in
the case of a CR). In recent years in which there have been
threats of shutdowns (especially in 2011 and 2013), OMB asked
agencies to prepare shutdown plans. When this happens, both the
OMB and federal agencies spent a great deal of time developing
these plans and reviewing them, which is a complete waste of time
unless the shutdown actually takes effect.

Preparing for CRs can also frequently be time consuming. One of
the most time-intensive processes involves dealing with
anomalies, which are specific exceptions to the general
limitation on funding in CRs. Since, by definition, these
anomalies are exceptions to the general rules governing a CR,
many agencies invariably think that their peculiar circumstances
deserve exceptional treatment. It is often quite difficult,
however, to get the Congress to go along with anomalies. This
leads to lots of negotiations between OMB and agencies over which
things can and cannot be appropriately be included as anomalies.

These inefficiencies do not stop the moment that the CR is
enacted. Agency budget offices, and OMB, are involved in lots of
conversations around budget execution once the CR is law. Many of
these discussions are designed to determine what can and cannot
be done, and when something is a continuation of a current
activity and when it represents something new. Agency budget
officials often have to spend inordinate time responding to
inquiries about what is and is not permitted under a CR. The GAO
case study agencies indicated that there were four types of
administrative tasks most often affected by CRs:

-- Issuing guidance to programs and offices;

-- Providing information to Congress and OMB;

-- Creating, disseminating and revising spending plans; and

-- Responding to questions and requests for additional funding
above the amount allotted.

There are no precise estimates of the costs of these tasks. GAO
reported that VHA estimated that a onemonth CR results in over $1
million in lost productivity at VA medical facilities and over
$140,000 in additional costs for the VA contracting office.

Effects of CRs on State and Local Governments and the Private
Sector.

The federal government provides substantial funds to state and
local governments, in the form of grants, and to the private
sector, in the form of contracts. The increased uncertainty, and
the increasing length of time covered, by CRs has created
increased costs and uncertainty for these sectors as well.
Federal grantmaking agencies reported to GAO, for example, that
CRs that extended beyond about mid February tended to delay
discretionary grant announcements, thus pushing back both
application reviews and awards. In some cases, grants were
cancelled, even though the funds were eventually provided. A
compressed application period can also decrease the quality of
application and review, and discourage some potential recipients
from applying for grants out of fear that they will have
insufficient time to prepare grant applications, which can be
complicated and time-consuming.

Agencies that award grants must decide, if operating on a long-
term (more than three months but less than a full year) CR,
whether to suspend grant application processes until an
appropriation is received or to go ahead with them, pending a
final appropriation. In the former case, there may not be enough
time available for potential recipients to prepare applications
and for agencies to process them in the second half of the year.
Therefore, what appears to be a delay may result in a
cancellation of the grant program, at least for the current year.
In the latter case, there is a risk that, if the funds are not
ultimately provided, the agency could have applications in hand
but no funding for the program. This occurred in fiscal year 2011
with the Department of Education`s Teaching American History
program.

A similar story exists for contractors. When stories began to
emerge in 2012 that speculated about the effects of
sequestration, the first effects that were discussed were the
impacts on federal contractors who had already started to react
to the threat of across-the-board cuts. If contractors believe
that an actual shutdown, or contract cancellation, is imminent,
they face difficult questions concerning whether or not to
continue work, and how long they can afford to keep employees on
board. Whether late appropriations ultimately lead to layoffs
depends on the contractor, and particularly on the rate of
turnover. There certainly are cases, especially for small
contractors, where layoffs are necessary. In 2011, for example,
Penn State University`s Applied Research Laboratory, heavily
funded by a contract with the Navy, reported having to lay off 13
engineers due to funding reductions from the Navy associated with
federal budget delays.

It is likely that the effects of uncertainty are felt more
acutely by firms with the following characteristics:

-- small businesses that may have less of a cushion against the
delay in funding for an apparently small contract. Smaller
businesses are less likely to have the capacity to ``ride out the
uncertainty`` associated with funding delays;

-- firms that work only for the government;

-- firms that are funded from agencies that have primarily one-
year money;

-- firms funded by agencies that are more likely to receive late
appropriations (some appropriation bills are more chronically
late than others);

-- contractors that are (especially within DOD) in the delivery
stage of a given project (as opposed to development) because
delivery involves higher personnel costs.

According to contractors who deal with both sectors, the biggest
difference between commercial and federal work is that for
commercial work the contractual firm can make long-term
commitments, whereas with a federal agency the commitment is year
to year. To the extent that there are capital costs, those
capital costs can be captured with certainty over a three-to-five
year period. A federal contract, conversely, may be a base
contract with 10 one-year options.

In the end, it is true that, in general, government work tends to
be more risky than commercial work. It is made even more risky in
cases where there may be some interruption in funding as a result
of a shutdown or default. A 2007 study, for example, of DOD
contracting delays found that nine out of twelve companies
included in the study experienced a decline in company stock
values as a result of these delays. It is likely that there are a
significant number of contractors who are unwilling to work with
the government, thus reducing competition and increasing costs.

What to Do About the Problem of Late Appropriations

Ultimately, the greatest impediment to fixing the problem of late
appropriations is that their negative consequences seem to be
largely invisible. Many of the same people who decry waste in
government, however, may themselves be contributing to that waste
by failing to provide a predictable funding stream to federal
agencies and recipients of federal funds. No state of local
government would be able to get away with this, without
consequences, as chronic funding delays would result in lowered
bond ratings, increased borrowing costs, and likely political
fallout. Despite this, of course, both the states of Illinois and
Pennsylvania have operated much of the current fiscal year
without a budget. These cases are notable because of how unusual
they are, and in both of these cases, the result has had the
predicted result of higher bond ratings. These market signals do
not seem to exist in the federal budget process. Despite the
apparent invisibility of these effects, however, it should be
clear that routine timely appropriations would have many positive
effects on budget formulation and execution, including the
following.

1. If appropriations were timely, it would improve budget
planning for future years. The clearest example of this has to do
with the President`s budget, where if the current year
appropriations are not enacted by around mid-December, it makes
it virtually impossible to have reliable information on which to
base proposed funding for the budget year.

2. If decisions in budget execution did not have to be made in
such compressed time frames, it would lead to better decisions
since agencies would not be (at least to the same extent) rushing
to make choices on contractors, grants, etc.

3. Agencies could begin to plan for hiring earlier in the year
which (given how long it can take to fill a position) increases
the chance that they will have a full complement available to
deliver priority services.

4. Investments in employees and in physical assets would be able
to be protected by permitting adequate funds to be provided for
employee training and maintenance of this physical capital.

5. Both the cost of contractual services and their quality would
be improved if appropriations were received in a timely manner.
Predictability would enable agencies to negotiate contracts at a
lower price and contractors would likely deliver higher-quality
service.

How can we encourage these positive effects? It is hard to avoid
starting with the obvious conclusion: Given all of the negative
consequences of late appropriations, the Congress should
discharge its most basic responsibility and routinely enact
appropriations before the beginning of the fiscal year. It is
hard to imagine that, the roughly eight months available between
the delivery of the President`s budget and the beginning of the
fiscal year would not provide sufficient time to enact
appropriations bills, provided that the Congress viewed it as a
significant priority. The fact that the federal government is a
large, complicated enterprise, and the federal budget process is
a complex process is not a sufficient excuse for this failure.

To begin and end with this conclusion seems particularly
unhelpful. For this reason, it is useful to consider some
recommendations that start from the assumption that the
Congressional appropriations process will not suddenly operate on
schedule. If we are stuck with late appropriations, what can be
done to minimize their effects?

1. The Congress could make more funding available on a multi-year
or no-year basis. At present, many agency salary and expense
budgets are provided using one-year money. If agencies had the
flexibility to obligate funds over multiple fiscal years, many of
the specific problems caused by late appropriations would be
reduced. This is not to suggest that all appropriations should
permit multi-year or no-year obligations, but it would be useful
to specifically review current practice with an eye toward
increasing the percentage where such multi-year obligations are
necessary. This might assist, in particular, those agencies with
lots of grant and contract funding.

2. The Congress might consider prohibiting continuing
resolutions, or making them more difficult to enact than regular
appropriations. This may seem like an odd recommendation, as it
increases the probability of a government shutdown. In fact, it
flies in the face of a more common recommendation, which is that
failure to enact appropriations should result in an automatic
continuing resolution (ACR). The problem is that ACRs may just
become the norm; that is, this might reduce the urgency of
enacting appropriations even further. Given the problems created
by CRs, this would not be a good outcome. Conversely, prohibiting
CRs or (for example) requiring a supermajority to pass them would
tend to lead to a situation where the options might be either a
full-year appropriation or a government shutdown. Perhaps if
there were MORE urgency in enacting appropriations, it would
increase the odds of them being enacted.

3. If CRs are to continue, it would be useful if, instead of CRs
that freeze spending at the prior year level, the Congress should
enact CRs that permit inflationary increases to the prior year
level. For those members of Congress and Presidents who believe
that spending should be frozen or reduced, this would provide an
incentive to reach agreement on appropriations in a timely
manner, since the default would be a higher level of spending.
For federal agencies, however, this would reduce the necessity of
counterproductive actions having to be taken in order to live
within a CR that requires spending at the prior year level. This
recommendation would also reduce, but not eliminate, the need for
anomalies, which should be held to a minimum in the interest of
lessening the substantial effort that goes into identifying and
negotiating them.

4. The Congress should avoid the temptation to micromanage the
budget execution process, particularly if late appropriations are
to continue to be the norm. Requirements imposed on some agencies
to have spending plans approved by Congressional committees are,
in the context of late appropriations, a costly ``luxury``. If
appropriations were timely, such a review could potentially be
justified. In cases where a final appropriation is not received
until 3 to 6 months into the fiscal year, there is no
justification for the additional delay that such a requirement
imposes on federal agencies and their ability to manage funds.

5. Moreover, the Congress and President should limit CRs to only
one or two per year that do not extend past the end of the
calendar year. It is important to recognize that all CRs are not
created equal. It matters how many there are, and it matters how
long agencies have to operate under them. Short CRs (especially
where there are multiple CRs lasting weeks, as opposed to months)
create all sorts of problems for federal agencies that increase
the odds of agency officials unwittingly violating some law or
engaging in counterproductive management practices. Problems
created by attempting to manage through CRs lasting 4 months, or
6 months (or more) are also well documented. If CRs are to be
enacted, it is important for them to be enacted in a way that
minimizes their negative effects.

It seems particularly important to focus on these improvements at
the present time, for two reasons. First, the problem is becoming
worse, not better. While historically the problem with late
appropriations has been more one of timing than of uncertainty of
the eventual funding level, recently federal agencies have found
themselves in a position where both the timing and the amount are
in serious question. The recent threat of the Budget Control
Act`s reductions in discretionary appropriations ratchets up this
level of uncertainty to a higher level. Independent of these
prospective cuts, the need to reduce federal debt will result in
a less than ``zero-sum`` game for federal agencies; having
sufficient time to plan for these budget reductions will be even
more important than ever.

My main message, then, is that funding delays have costs. Some of
these costs are financial, and others are felt through
compromised government effectiveness. Either way, these are
completely self-inflicted wounds. The negative impacts are
unacceptable given the importance of the federal budget to the
overall performance of the U.S. economy and the delivery of
services to citizens. The Congress should do what it can to
minimize these costs, even if they cannot be eliminated.