Statement of Dr. Keith B. Payne
Professor and Head, Graduate Department of Defense and Strategic
Studies
Missouri State University

Committee on Senate Armed Services
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces

January 27, 2016

I greatly appreciate the honor of participating in today`s
hearing.

I would like to start by noting that there has been a near-
overwhelming bipartisan consensus on US nuclear policies over the
past five decades. Despite the occasional flare ups, our nuclear
debates typically have not been over fundamentals.

For example, there is a long-standing agreement that two primary
roles for US nuclear weapons are to deter enemies and to help
assure our allies of their security.

From the broad agreement on these two goals follow many points of
consensus regarding what we should do and say about our nuclear
capabilities. For example, because a variety of plausible nuclear
attacks must be deterred, and no one knows the minimum US
capabilities necessary and credible to deter them, there is a
long-standing bipartisan consensus in support of hedging,
flexibility, diversity and overlapping US deterrence
capabilities.

Every Republican and Democratic administration for five decades,
including the Obama administration, ultimately has understood the
value of these attributes and ultimately rejected a minimalist
deterrence as inadequate and incredible. From this consensus has
followed our longstanding consensus in favor of sustaining a
diverse nuclear triad of bombers, land-based and seabased
missiles.

Similarly, from the fundamental nuclear policy goal of assuring
allies follows the continuing consensus behind sustaining some US
nuclear forces that are forward deployed, such as our DCA in
Europe, or forward-deployable depending on local conditions and
history. These points of fundamental consensus remain with us
today.

There are, nevertheless, some recent and unprecedented
developments that justify a contemporary DOD review of US
deterrence policy and requirements.

For example, we need to recognize that the optimistic post-Cold
War expectations about Russia that dominated earlier thinking do
not reflect contemporary reality, and review US policies
accordingly: to be specific, the Putin regime`s strategic vision
for Russia is highly revisionist and destabilizing. It includes
the reestablishment of Russian dominance of the near abroad via
``Russification`` and the use of force if needed.

Most disturbing in this regard is that Moscow seeks to prevent
any significant collective Western military opposition to its
offensive military operations by threatening local nuclear first
use. The underlying Russian presumption appears to be the
expectation that the US and NATO will concede territory rather
than face the possibility of Russian nuclear first use. This
Russian strategy is not the Cold War notion of a mutual balance
of terror: it is a fundamentally new, coercive use of nuclear
weapons and threats.

Russian military officials speak openly of the preemptive
employment of nuclear weapons in a conventional war. And
according to open Russian sources, Russia has pursued
specialized, lowyield nuclear weapons to make its first-use
threats credible and its weapons locally employable. If Russian
planning now follows this apparent policy (and I have no reason
to believe it does not), it tells me that US and NATO deterrence
policy is now failing in a fundamental way, and the consequences
of that failure could be catastrophic.

Consequently, the unprecedented question to be considered in a
new review is how the alliance can effectively deter this
combined arms threat to our allies and partners: What deterrence
concepts may be applicable? And, what are the corresponding
metrics for Western conventional and nuclear force adequacy? What
are the gaps perceived by Moscow in US will and capabilities, and
how might those gaps be filled? Does the United States need
``new`` nuclear capabilities for deterrence and assurance, or are
the existing options in the stockpile adequate?

In addition, according to numerous reports, the US nuclear
infrastructure no longer is able to respond in a timely way to
the possibility of new requirements for deterrence and assurance.
That capability has been lost. If true, what level of readiness
should be deemed adequate and what needs to be done to achieve
that goal? We also need to reconsider the prioritization of our
nuclear policy goals. The 2010 NPR explicitly placed
nonproliferation as the top policy goal, and stated that reducing
the number of and reliance on US nuclear weapons was a key to
realizing that top goal. The ``take away`` from that position is
that the US must further reduce its nuclear arsenal to serve its
highest nuclear policy goal. This point is repeated often by
critics of the administration`s nuclear modernization programs.

Yet, at this point, the goal of nonproliferation should no longer
be used as the policy rationale to further hammer US nuclear
deterrence capabilities. After two decades of reducing our
nuclear deterrent and focusing elsewhere, and the emergence of
unprecedented nuclear threats to us and our allies, the
deterrence rationale for reviewing our nuclear policy priorities
and the adequacy of our nuclear deterrence forces is
overwhelming.

Finally, since the end of the Cold War, the study of Russia and
the Russian language has declined dramatically in our educational
system in general, and the U.S. intelligence community reportedly
has largely divested itself of the capacity to understand Russian
nuclear-weapons policy, programs, and war planning. This is a
dangerous inadequacy: deterrence strategies depend fundamentally
on our understanding of an adversary`s thinking and planning. If
we hope to deter effectively, we must review the intellectual
resources necessary to perform this vital task, and begin it
again.

There are many additional points that could be made on this
subject, but in deference to the time, I will stop here.
