Body




Statement of Tami De Coteau, PhD
Licensed Clinical Psychologist
DeCoteau Trauma-Informed Care & Practice, PLLC

Committee on Senate Indian Affairs

August 17, 2016

Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, my name is Dr. Tami De
Coteau. I am an enrolled tribal member of the Mandan Hidatsa
Arikara Nation and a proud descendant of the Turtle Mountain
Chippewa. I have worked as a licensed clinical psychologist with
an emphasis on the treatment of trauma disorders for more than a
decade. In addition to maintaining a busy patient caseload, I own
a Bismarck-based private practice that employs 6 mental health
workers who are uniquely trained in the application of trauma-
specific interventions for adults, children and families. Thank
you for holding this hearing on trauma and mental health
challenges in Indian country and inviting me to testify.

Senator Heitkamp, I would like to thank you for your key role in
advancing Native American priorities, your efforts to improve the
lives of Native American people and for illuminating the
important but tragically overlooked issue of historical trauma. I
would also like to thank you for drafting and advocating for S.
246, ``The Alyce Spotted Bear and Walter Soboleff Commission on
Native Children.`` S. 246 is essential to enhancing the lives of
Native children. I have been asked by members of the Committee to
focus my testimony on my professional experience and my clinical
perspective on trauma.

Professional Experience

I obtained a doctorate degree in Clinical Psychology in 2003 from
the University of NebraskaLincoln with specialization in the
cognitive-behavioral treatment of anxiety disorders, which at the
time encompassed trauma disorders. My professional practice work
has focused on providing services to trauma-survivors. I am
certified in trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy. I have
received training in the Neurosequential Model of Therapuetics
(NMT; Perry), a developmentally sensitive, neurobiology-informed
approach to working with at-risk children; Trust-Based Relational
Intervention (TBRI; Purvis), a therapeutic model that trains
caregivers to provide effective support for at-risk children; and
Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR; Shapiro), an
intervention approach that helps reduce the long-lasting effects
of traumatic memories.

During my undergraduate and graduate training I received the
honor of becoming a McNair Scholar and then an American
Psychological Association (APA) Fellow. I also received the
Indian Health Service 2009 Health Professional of the Year Award
for outstanding service and the American Psychological Foundation
2010 Early Career Award for providing culturally competent
practice techniques for Native Americans and for developing
training programs in rural, underserved areas.

My career began with the Veteran`s Administration where I
provided psychological services to traumatized Veterans. During
my interim at the VA, Dr. Arthur McDonald (Ogala Lakota) and I
joined forces to create psychology internship training and
services for Native Americans. Our initial effort was funded by
HRSA/BHP. During the 3-year grant phase we designed and
implemented a model for training psychologists to provide
culturally competent and relevant services in rural Native
American communities. From this experience, evolved the stimulus
for a much greater vision to develop reservation-based internship
programs with unique missions to restore the individual and the
collective sense of worth of Native American people by supporting
the belief that the healing of Native Nations lies within the
Nations themselves.

The Standing Rock Psychology Internship and Post-doctoral Program
became the flagship model of our vision. The Program evidenced
success in recruiting and retaining psychology providers for
rural Native American populations and substantially increased
accessible mental health services. Doctorate-level trainees
worked collaboratively with tribal health, schools, and judicial
departments. In addition to the well over 3,000 hours of direct
patient care, trainees provided community education, suicide
prevention, and even equine assisted psychotherapy. One of the
highlights of the Program was the mobile crisis response team
that worked to prevent and reduce suicides on the reservation.
The Program was a tribally-driven initiative that provided an
excellent example of Indian self-determination.

Unfortunately, it is difficult to sustain mental health services
on the reservation. Mental health providers in Indian Country are
at a particularly high risk for burnout. We work in an intense
and crisis-oriented environment on a day-to-day basis. We face an
unusual array of highlystressful conditions including inadequate
compensation, safety issues, lack of basic resources such as
supplies and testing materials, professional isolation, lack of
appropriate referral and consultation resources, excessive time
demands, and inadequate funding. In addition, we serve a patient
population that has an unimaginable amount of emotional trauma
and social problems. These conditions cause us to experience a
constant state of physical and mental exhaustion and lead to
feelings of depersonalization and dissatisfaction. It is no
surprise that decreased worker effectiveness and burnout are
common among mental health professional in rural Indian Country.

While my heart still resides in working on Indian reservations, I
have been drawn towards education and advocacy for trauma-
survivors including training local teachers, educating
congressional leaders, and serving as the president of Council
for Native American TraumaInformed Initiatives which is hosting
this afternoon`s Roundtable on the Causes and Effects of Trauma
In Native American Communities.

Thus, in 2011, I step away from my clinical work on the
reservation and began work as a private practice and consulting
psychologist in Bismarck, ND. In a very short amount of time my
clinic schedule was full of patients, primarily children in
foster care with complex developmental trauma. Whether it be on,
or off the reservation the need for trauma-based psychological
services in North Dakota is immense. Over the course of my career
I have become acutely aware of the ``culture of trauma`` that is
overwhelming Indian communities and inhibiting the traditional
``healing culture`` practices. I will discuss the culture of
trauma first.

The Culture of Trauma

Historical trauma is the cumulative impact of historical losses
caused by European settlers` efforts to exterminate Native
Americans and our culture and transmitted across generations. The
assimilation policies of the federal government, particularly the
one that involved sending young Indian children to boarding
schools, continue to have a tremendous detrimental effect on
Indian people. This history has led to a generational pattern of
trauma that perpetuates itself in the form of abuse, neglect,
substance addiction, violence, mental unwellness, physical
illness, and unresolved grief.

Trauma by definition is an unbearable and out of control
sensation in the body. It leaves an imprint on the mind, body and
brain and results in reorganization of the way the mind and brain
manage perceptions. Trauma changes what we think, how we think,
and our very capacity to think. Traumatized people have trouble
deciphering what is going on around them. They superimpose their
trauma on everything. Individuals who become conditioned to
adversity come to believe they have no control over their lives
so they give up trying - a response referred to as learned
helplessness. Trauma affects those who are directly exposed to it
as well as those around them. The current challenges in Indian
country, including difficulties with social-environmental,
physiological and psychological functioning, are evidence that
the trauma that occurred long ago continues to impact Native
Americans today.

The therapists in my practice serve hundreds of traumatized
individuals, many of whom are Native American children. The gut-
wrenching impact of trauma on these precious souls is evident in
their persistent hyperarousal and hyperactivity. These children
struggle to regulate their own emotions, attend to stimuli, and
their capacity for learning is often greatly impaired. While they
are desperate for love and affection, their persisting fear-
response causes them to perceive everything as threating, and
they are likely to lash out at even the most loving caregivers.
Children who have such complex trauma cannot become functioning
members of society without skillful trauma-focused intervention.

The Healing Culture

Research shows that helping trauma survivors to describe their
trauma is helpful, but is often not enough. Since trauma is
encoded in the mind and body, for healing to occur, mind-body
communication is needed. Scientists have discovered that
individuals can restore their arousal system through practices
such as mindfulness, movement, and rhythm - principles that have
been used by Native American cultures for centuries. Although
Native principles in healing have long been regarded as nonsense
by modern day medicine, we now have scientific proof that the
ability to heal ourselves and our communities lies within our
traditional cultural practices.

Recommendations

Recent scientific studies have developed some practical and
effective interventions for trauma, and we now have a pretty good
idea of what tribes can do to address the causes and effects of
historical and childhood trauma. A comprehensive trauma-informed
initiative that involves every institution on the reservation
must be implemented. My recommendations are provided below.

1. Implement Comprehensive Trauma Informed Initiatives. There is
no one single intervention that every tribe must adopt. Rather,
there are a number of different ones that have been shown to be
effective for a specific area - the schools, the mental health
program, the law enforcement system, and so on. Each tribe needs
to select the approaches that are most appropriate for its values
and culture. The keys are that the initiative must be
comprehensive and the community must be fully educated about
trauma and involved in the initiative. The problem is that right
now there is no place a tribe can turn to in order to obtain
technical assistance in setting up a comprehensive trauma-
informed program. I urge Congress to appropriate funds to create
an institute that would provide on-going assistance to tribes
that are seeking to implement a comprehensive trauma-informed
initiative.

2. Provide funding for the use of interns. There is a desperate
and immediate need for increased human service resources in order
to address childhood and historical trauma. Although the Standing
Rock Program is no longer in operation its model is universally
applicable and has the ability to be reproduced in other
underserved areas. By providing funding to enable tribes to
implement psychology intern programs that bring pre- and
postdoctoral psychologists to reservations we can expand the
mental health workforce in our region.

Conclusion

Mr. Chairman and honorable members of the Committee, childhood
and historical trauma are long-standing issues that have
detrimental effects on our Federal and State budgets, health, and
overall well-being. Indian Country needs maximum mental health
power to deal with the trauma. Money must be allocated for tribal
comprehensive trauma initiatives. I thank you for the time and
opportunity to share my perspective on trauma and mental health
challenges in Indian Country.
