Body




Statement of Nikos Passas
Professor of Criminology and Criminal Justice, College of Social
Sciences and Humanities,
Northeastern University

Committee on House Financial Services
Subcommittee on Terrorism Financing Task Force Task Force

February 3, 2016

Introduction

Terrorism is a persistent threat with no quick and easy solution.
Anticipating the moves of terrorists and preventing their actions
has become a top priority. In order to do so, the U.S. and the
international community have introduced financial controls, along
with military action and law enforcement techniques, to predict,
restrict, and prevent terrorist activities.

Countering terrorism finance (CFT) is not only about cutting off
funds or mere displacement of sources and methods. Rather, the
point is to undermine the finances and support networks of target
groups. Conceived as financial vigilance, CFT helps focus on both
fund raising and expenditure, as well as on partners, associates,
facilitators, support networks, methods of operation and
distribution of labor. Key nodes of information, intelligence and
support can be identified and targeted as appropriate for more
effective and sustainable results. The aim is to understand what
they do, how they do it and how to identify the key nodes of
critical networks, partners and facilitators, blind eyes and
corrupt enablers, so that we can more effectively disrupt their
activities and achieve sustainable and long-term success (Passas,
2007).

Trade is not only a critical support system for numerous terror
groups, but also the weakest link in the anti-money laundering
(AML) infrastructure built since the 1980s. Despite substantial
efforts, laws, measures and resources devoted to AML/CFT, there
has been no systematic review or consistent action with respect
to trade, which constitutes the biggest security and crime
vulnerability, a black hole undermining the entire control
framework.

Even if all current rules were ever to be fully and consistently
enforced throughout the world, billions of dollars could still be
moved illicitly without detection and sanction. When CFT is not
based on the best evidence and analysis the result is missed
targets, false positives, false negatives and security
weaknesses.

Imports and exports can hide illegal or controlled commodities
trade, but they often shield significant illicit financial
transactions. This can be accomplished by mis-declaring the
quality, quantity, value, origin, destination, and final use of
goods. Mis-invoicing, trade diversion, counterfeiting and cargo
theft are some of the most common methods (deKieffer, 2008;
Passas, 1994; Passas & Nelken, 1993). Multiple terrorist groups
are involved in these, so a focus on trade and terrorism is long
overdue.

In this statement, I am summarizing some of the most important
lessons learned through work I have been doing since 1989 on
illicit financial and trade flows, including money laundering,
the abuse of hawala and other informal remittance systems,
terrorism and proliferation finance and the interface between
legal and illegal actors. In a nutshell, the threats are serious
but the good news is that effective responses are feasible and
within reach. First I will review the challenges we face and then
will outline available practical approaches and solutions.

The Challenges

Three global flows need monitoring and analysis for a clear
picture of illicit flows: financial, information and trade.
Ideally, these flows must become traceable and analyzed in
parallel, so that discrepancies and anomalies can be revealed and
studied. Most of our attention so far focuses on finance and
information, but even there the work is imperfect and sources not
cross-checked. Trade, on the other hand, is for the most part non-
transparent, neglected and extremely vulnerable to abuse.

Abuses do occur routinely, not only for money laundering, but
also for tax evasion, bribery and corruption, subsidy and other
types of fraud, sanctions violations, embargo and quota
violations, capital flight, as well as the financing of terrorism
and WMD proliferation. The amounts involved are not known with
precision but they are certainly staggering and likely exceed $1
trillion per annum. Many terror groups have used commodities in
the modus operandi: from the Islamic State and al Qaeda in Iraq
to the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), Jemaah al Islamiya, Tamil
Tigers (LTTE), Hamas, Hizballah, the Partiya Karkeren Kurdistan
(PKK) the Northern Alliance, al Qaeda, Groupe Islamique Arme
(GIA), the Irish Republic Army, as well as Armenian, Chechen and
Georgian paramilitary groups (Cassara, 2015; Freeman, 2012;
Passas, 2011a, 2011b; Passas & Jones, 2006; Shelley, 2015).

When it comes to the trillions of dollars in trade volume
annually, our vision is blurred for several reasons. First of
all, relevant information is not collected in one place for
consolidated analysis at the national and international level.
Relevant information is collected by Customs, FinCEN, Department
of Commerce, port authorities and their counterparts in other
countries. Other data are in the hands of banks, insurance
companies, brokers, shippers and logistics companies, importers
and exporters. No one is getting the full picture because no one
collects all of the information in one place.

Secondly, financial institutions are expected to focus on
transactions monitoring working with large data that would
presumably cover everything but end up identifying much less
actionable intelligence than desired. A good deal of compliance
work has become an automated tick-the box exercise that yields
millions of SARs and massive false positives.

These in turn tend to waste the time of personnel that must deal
with them, rather than centering on the highest risks, analytical
work for typologies or new algorithms, the identification of
offenders and closer collaboration with controllers. After all,
financial institutions have incentives to avoid heavy fines and
reputational damage rather than to discover and chase away bad
clients. In addition, financial institutions can only review data
about their clients and have no way of accessing either
government or other banks` clients and analysis. This leads to
costly duplication of work and an incomplete view of the problem.

Thirdly, while some government work has been done on commerce-
connected informal remittance and payment networks, such as
hawala and black market peso exchange (BMPE), there has been no
systematic assessment of trade threats and vulnerabilities in
different economic sectors. Even when it comes to Informal Value
Transfer Systems (IVTS), a term I coined in a study for the Dutch
Ministry of Justice (Passas, 1999), no threat assessment has been
done since the studies commissioned by FinCEN right after 9/11
(Passas, 2003a, 2003c). The problem is that these informal
networks evolve constantly and adapt to regulatory and law
enforcement practices in different countries and environments in
many of which they are outlawed (FATF, 2013). It is essential to
keep an eye on these changes and also realize that hawala is not
only a challenge for controllers, but can also be an invaluable
intelligence asset (Passas, 2008) that can be leveraged in many
places including Afghanistan, India and Somalia for both control
purposes and assistance to fragile communities. This could
address at once and synergistically terrorism finance, crime
control, development and humanitarian policy objectives (Passas,
2015a, 2015b, 2016; SIGAR, 2013).

Finally, the value of open source information is under-estimated
and under-utilized. Reviewing and working only with classified
and private data excludes information on the internet, in the
press, public reports and research literature from NGOs and
academics. Yet, these sources point to knowledge gaps,
misunderstandings, contextual information, insights and items
unavailable elsewhere that might contradict conventional wisdom
or non-public data and discredit sources we should not rely too
much on. This is all particularly relevant to the analysis of
illicit networks, identification of true beneficial ownership,
adverse media news in local or foreign publications, terrorism
finance, sanctions violations, corruption, illicit enrichment and
other issues of interest to those in charge of due diligence and
investigative tasks.

The Solution

The answer to all of these challenges can be found by simply
addressing the opportunities we have been missing up to now. As
noted, all of the necessary data are not in one place but do
exist. Hawala is not only a problem but also an intelligence
asset and resource, if properly handled. Agencies that gather
useful information can be encouraged to share it. Open source
data are available for analysis. The private sector and academia
can assist with additional data, collection in a secure
environment, analysis and feedback to both government and
business with red flags and guidance. Our view is blurred thus
unnecessarily. It is like having a 4K TV that we use for analog
programs instead of creating the feed for a high-definition
picture of the global illegal trade and finance. The means are
there to create it.

There are several data categories that can be collected
systematically.

-- InboundManifest/Movement data are provided to governments by
carriers and shippers on goods arriving in a country by road,
rail, sea, and air. These records offer details on what goods are
received where, when and who is involved.

-- OutboundManifest/Movement Transactions are equivalent data on
goods leaving a country.

-- Import Declarations to governments when goods enter the
economy. These are usually public in aggregate form.

-- Export Declarations for goods leaving the economy.

Some of these data are published online, but there are also
companies that collect and provide such information for a fee
(e.g., Port Import Export Reporting Service - PIERS). U.S. import
and export data can be obtained from U.S. Department of Commerce
and International Trade Commission websites. Other countries
publish theirs in revenue collection and official statistics
agencies` websites. The United Nations also publishes trade
information.

Port and ship-loading information, Electronic Data Interchange
(EDI) records, which are standardized computer-to-computer
documents between businesses can be used for the analysis for
shipments, invoices and container movements. Trade finance,
insurance, storage, satellite imaging, cash handling and
movements data can be added to the database too. In the U.S., for
example, Geographic Targeting Orders have been used in different
states and yield complete records of Money Service Business (MSB)
transactions.

By adding crime statistics, criminal records, reports of
investigations, open source literature in multiple languages and
qualitative on-the-ground sources, such as interviews from
different jurisdictions, we can make case studies, pattern
analysis and the mapping of criminal networks much easier, richer
in details and policy useful. Oil, trade finance, antiquities,
food and agriculture, medical and arms-related data can be
tracked and added to the database especially for action against
terrorist groups like the Islamic State that control territory,
have access to natural resources, engage in trade and perform
quasi government functions that leave traces.

A Promising Way Forward

Concrete steps the U.S. Government should consider include the
following:

-- Ensure that all government data are gathered and analyzed in
one place that can liaise also with law enforcement agencies for
swift action. FinCEN, for example could be ideal for this
purpose.

-- With appropriate legal pathways, bring all available private
sector trade data and open source data together through a trusted
third party, such as a university, that can develop a system to
receive, securely store and analyze them in a consolidated way. A
university can generate new data and collaborate with government
agencies (e.g., FinCEN) to develop patterns, identify
irregularities, generate typologies and red flags, issue
guidance, and produce evidence-based investigative clues. Many of
the problems cited with respect to financial institutions could
be resolved with this type of collective action and synergies
among business and the government. The university would also help
obviate the reluctance of businesses to share information for
competitive reasons.

Below are some illustrations of how such analysis has been done
in the past in Northeastern`s NIJ-sponsored collaborations with
FinCEN, DHS and the Department of Justice. It should be
emphasized that the examples below do not constitute evidence of
serious misconduct and crimes. Disparities may reflect errors,
honest mistakes or some special commercial practices, such as
inventory management and returned goods. These are clues for
follow-up and investigations that can produce the necessary
evidence.

The simplest first step is to compare import and export official
records to see where these do not match. Items declared as
exported from country A to country B, should be about the same
the items declared as imported in country B from country A. This
is often not the case as shown in tobacco trade statistics
between the United States and Japan or Switzerland in the past.

Another type of analysis is comparing declared value per unit for
the same commodity in a given time period in different countries.
When looking at world market prices for licorice for example, we
see that these ranged roughly between $.50 and $.75 in the period
between 1994 and 2007. This is what we see by looking at imports
from Azerbaijan below. However, when we examine the figures for
imports from Turkmenistan during exactly the same time span, we
can identify substantial outliers worthy of investigation, as
some values go up to $5.00.

The numbers go through the roof, when we do the same analysis for
Syria during the same period. In fact, the whole pattern of value
is completely lost with transactions showing values in the teens
and the twenties reaching all the way up to $26.00. It is
certainly important for someone to routinely and regularly
monitor for such discrepancies and irregularities to find out
what explains them and what action must be taken.

Pricing irregularities that make no commercial sense includes
instances where obviously cheaper goods are imported for too high
values. Scrap gold (in blue in the figure below), for example,
must be much cheaper than pure gold (in red). This is the pattern
observed in U.S. imports of gold from Mexico. Scrap and pure gold
U.S. imports from Colombia however are all over the place. Some
must ask the question who in the U.S. is buying scrap gold for
double the price of pure gold and why. A review of diamond
imports into the U.S. show how we sometimes do not know where
things are coming from, where they are going and what values are
moved: over a period of many years, brokers did not declare to
Customs the identity of the real importers of record, but gave
instead their own tax ID or someone else`s. G. Britain has been
declared as the place of origin and provenance of rough diamonds,
even though G. Britain has no diamond mines. The declared price
of polished diamonds imported from G. Britain ranged between a
few dollars to $100,000 showing how diverse the value of stones
is and how vulnerable this market is to mis-invoicing.

-- Such clues and associated red flags can be communicated to
banks and all relevant private sector entities for focused action
and for their feedback with what information they find on such
targets from their end. This can generate valuable new insights
into specific targets and help control terrorist finance more
effectively. A happy circle will be set off with the private
sector making tangible contributions at a much lower cost.

-- Update information on hawala and related IVTS methods of
operation in the US and other geographic areas of concern.
Methods keep changing and adapting to regulatory and law
enforcement practices around the world. A new hawala review will
be instrumental to more effective AML/CFT as well as control of
illegal migration and smuggling. When hawala intermediaries want
to help, they can. The Islamic State blackmails and steals a
great deal from them too. Victims of extortion, including
individuals and hawaladars can be extraordinary intelligence
sources. Suspecting that this Committee may examine more in depth
remittances, de-risking practices and hawala in the future, I
leave a review of this issue and how hawala can be leveraged for
CFT and crime control in the appendix to this statement.

-- None of this is new. The feasibility of these proposals is
demonstrated by the results of work on hawala, IVTS (Appendix)
and trade of commodities like gold, diamonds and tobacco (above)
at Northeastern in collaboration with U.S. government agencies
right after 9/11 (Passas, 2004a, 2004c, 2004d; Passas & Jones,
2007). Other studies have been conducted in partnership with the
Caribbean FATF to (free trade zones and financial crime in 6
jurisdictions) and with the Arizona Attorney General`s office,
when we combined MSB, official and PIERS trade data to analyze a
Trade-Based-Money-Laundering case involving the U.S., Mexico and
China (Passas, forthcoming).

Ongoing work with Europe and M. East-based research organizations
furnishes several partners ready to be enlisted in a collective
action (offering data, adding resources, facilitating interviews,
etc.), for instance targeting the Islamic State. This would be an
excellent pilot of the general approach as the Islamic State has
enemies in virtually all state and non-state actors in and around
the territory they control. Similar universal condemnation and
collective action took place in the financial against coalition
against child pornography (see http://www.missingkids.com/FCACP),
so there is good precedent for acting against serious and
specific targets with consensus. Moreover, legal hurdles with
data protection in Europe might be lowered as security, refugee
and illicit flows have become a top priority there.

-- Once positive outcomes are produced, this can be scaled up for
other groups and financial crimes to include consolidated and low-
cost risk analysis, regularly updated and focused guidance,
training and capacity building for business and government
officials.

With all this, instead of shooting in the dark, we can shed light
on shadowy economic activities and go after well-defined targets.
The data, the networks to produce new data, the technology for
analysis, the analytical capacity, the previous experience and
willingness to collaborate are all there. You have in your hands
the switch to turn the lights onto what is now shadowy economic
activities supporting the Islamic State, Boko Haram, al Shabab
and other terror groups. I urge you to do it.
